These data specialists utilise vast datasets and employ methodologies that diverge considerably from the conventions of social sciences.
However, the notion of replication and reliability are not relevant for (most) qualitative researchers because these concepts neither fit the logic of qualitative research or work when doing qualitative research (e.g., when interviewing people over time they do naturally change their view and have different experiences).
We need to say something about the relationship between text and language.
They defined ‘grounded theory' in these words as ‘The theory that was derived from data, systematically gathered and analysed through the research process' (Strauss & Corbin, 1990, p.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1), 210-230.
Hordge-Freeman's statement represents the type of strong reflexivity most advocated in constructivist grounded theory.
For example, individuals who participate in research on topics such as discrimination in the workplace, persecution, illegal behaviours, immigration, and health status (e.g., disclosures of mental health or physical health conditions) could face future harm if their identity could be disclosed.
MacLean (Eds.), Exploring the social world: Social research in action (pp.
Understanding in its context: Here, the effort to understand the experience (situation, phenomenon) that is the subject of the qualitative study in its own context is dominant.
The association for the study of medical education.
• Analysis models of (socio-technical or other) system.
Not seeking consent ‘This is a university hospital : : : ' ‘He both comes here and wants something' How it relates to the context Instead of expressing and sharing feelings, it is a cumulative, explosive, charged reactive way of relating: Tolerating boredom, embarrassment, and finally responding explosively (patient and physician) Patient: ‘don't let them be in the room when we get back : : : ' Physician: ‘This is a university hospital : : : ' ‘he both comes here and wants something' Taking your guard up in battle Relating by being silence, storing up (students): Silence, guilty standing, and invisibility
With this framework, which can be named as ‘Triple Contextual Understanding and Interpretation', it is possible to differentiate the understanding and interpretation of qualitative studies as follows: 1.
Beginning in a hypertext environment, scholars can begin to construct portraitures that are more compelling descriptions.
The mandate is to remain open to what is actually happening and not to start filtering data through pre-conceived hypotheses and biases to listen and observe and thereby discover the main concern of the participants in the field and how they resolve this concern.
The prevalent use of interactive collection methods, such as online surveys and computer-assisted interviews, necessitates stringent protocols to safeguard data and uphold the anonymity of respondents, especially amidst escalating concerns over cyber-attacks and data breaches.
This core variable, which appears to account for most of the variation around the concern or problem that is the focus of the study, becomes the focus of further selective data collection and coding efforts.
Abstract: The differentiation of contemporary approaches to qualitative data analysis can seem daunting even for experienced social science researchers.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ socsci12100570 Academic Editor: Bridgette Wessels Received: 6 July 2023 Revised: 14 September 2023 Accepted: 5 October 2023 Published: 12 October 2023
Pandza, K., Thorpe, R.: Management as Design, but What Kind of Design?
The analyst soon sees where each concept fits and works, its relevance and how it will carry forward in the cumulative development of the theory.
The imbrication is a result of the make plan of one artefact being part of the use plan of another artefact.
In practice, research collaboration and collaborative analysis have numerous methodological advantages.
Researchers had to be trusted to select the evidence that most convincingly supported their arguments and consumers of the research were left to judge if the task was well done.
The transformative effects of digitisation, datafication, and innovative technologies have been profound.
(2016) introduced the 4C collaborative work model, outlining the collaborative capabilities of the qualitative analysis software webQDA.
For example, by comparing incidents and modifying the substantive theory of milkmen who engage in cultivating housewives for profit and recreation, a GT of cultivation can apply easily to doctors cultivating clients to build a practice, thereby expanding the original substantive theory to include cultivating down instead of cultivating up the social scale.
Substantive codes conceptualize the empirical substance of the area of research.
‘The grounded theory researcher has three important characteristics: An ability to conceptualize data, an ability to tolerate some confusion, and an ability to tolerate confusion's attendance regression.
Understanding modelling in technology and science: The potential of stories from the field.
[49] Line by line coding forces the analyst to verify and saturate categories, minimizes missing an important category and ensures the grounding of categories the data beyond impressionism.
Thanks to digital possibilities and advances, our society, economics, and culture are changing and revolving in ways we have never seen before.
In the midst of his hundreds of tasks, our specialist had forgotten that the argument had even happened this morning.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/104973239600600306 Burns, N., & Grove, S.
If, however, researchers only ask the same questions of each participant, they are likely to elicit similar stories about the topic.
This is a meaningful concept, as there are also many systems that do not include people.
Indeed, we would hope that an article such as this one would help make it easier to justify these purchases by showing how much they can facilitate and gain efficiencies throughout the research process.
The second is the expertise required to run that hardware and software.
They proposed a new type of sampling, ‘theoretical sampling', to fill out these categories with new data.
Auld, G., Diker, A., Bock, M., Boushey, C., Bruhn, C., Cluskey, C., .
Educational technology: Media for inquiry, communication, construction, and expression.
But, instead of the tape recorder sitting in the middle of a table with a microphone pointing intrusively toward the participant, we have begun using two-way radio transmitter-receivers and digital recording devices where both interviewer and interviewee are equipped with a microphone and transmitter that attaches inconspicuously to a lapel or shirt collar.
At the outset any literature one accesses can be imported into a NVivo project, and sophisticated and almost error-free optical character recognition (OCR) software programs such as Abbyy Fine Reader, OmniPage, or Readirus, can make any imagebased document both searchable and codable.
In the computer age, the algorithm, in the form of software program, is executed by a computer processor.
It is based on the power of hypertext link so that "anything can link to anything"(Berners-Lee et al., 2001).
Lofland, J., Snow, D., Anderson, L., & Lofland, L.
The make plan of the metal object is a textual artefact, e.g.
Tools like CAQDAS have significantly changed the way we approach qualitative research.
Research decisions: Quantitative and qualitative perspectives (4th ed.).
These researchers do not realize that while often using the same type of qualitative data, the GT and QDA methods are sufficiently at odds with each other as to be incapable of integration.
However, general observations regarding implementing new digital technologies into the methodology of computer-assisted qualitative data analysis and qualitative research practices require comprehensive solutions regarding data archiving, data security, or computational capabilities.
Once he identified these spaces, he arranged to post variations of the same advertisements that he placed in the commercial newsgroup spaces in the hopes that members would learn about the research and then pass this knowledge back to the community.
(2013) grounded theory of double victimizing is considered to be situated, fallible and provisional, and therefore embraces modifiability (Glaser 1998).
If possible, work with a mentor who is knowledge able about your approach.
Disclosure statement No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
A.: Positioning and presenting design science research for maximum impact.
Digital Society, Methods, and Possibilities Digitality is a foundational element in understanding the concept of a digital society.
These are very important points which describe what interpretivist research are not.
Therefore, researchers still face severe technical difficulties when integrating and analyzing data obtained from heterogeneous sources.
"Functional Units" are ReferenceUnits, but not all ReferenceUnits are "Functional Units."
Thus, we can demonstrate what does not work within the team coding process.
15309290, 2022, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jiec.13220 by Cochrane Uruguay, Wiley Online Library on [18/06/2025].
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
This mismatch impedes fully realising digitisation's potential in the social sciences.
It will force its own beginning, middle, and end for writing.
In EXIOBASE, examples of FlowObjects are "Wheat" or "Aluminum and aluminium products." In YSTAFDB, examples of FlowObjects are "phosphate rock output" or "phosphorus, societal consumption output." FlowObjects also include names of natural resources (land, minerals, etc.); waste or emissions as well as non-material flows such as social or economic flows (employment, taxes, compensation, etc.)
The result is a default remodeling of classic GT into just another QDA method with all its descriptive baggage.
He continued to complain in a harsh tone that he was coming here and demanding something.
After seeing how your codes coalesce and identifying which are the most important, you can stop line-byline coding.
Audio elements, integrated into the research narrative provide readers with a better sense of context, as well.
The BONSAI ontology was developed, finalized, and adapted to the Resource Data Framework (RDF) (see Box 1) during two hackathons arranged in March 2019 and January 2020 with domain experts and knowledge graph developers.
This concern is exacerbated in much qualitative research, as the data often situate participants in context, providing great detail about individuals and communities.
The make plan basically expresses the composition of the object in terms of components and allows reproducing individuals conforming to the artefact.
Keywords: CAQDAS; artificial intelligence; digital methods; digital skills; collaborative analysis
I will hit hard that GT deals with the data as it is, not what QDA wishes it to be or, more formally, what QDA preconceives to be accurate and to be forcefully conceptualized.
theory a general guide to multi-conditional, ever-changing daily situations' (p.
Soft skills, which can sometimes be undervalued next to technical skills, are equally essential.
Currently, developing sophisticated SPARQL queries is a highly technical process and possesses as a high cognitive entry barrier (Kamdar et al., 2019).
Machine learning and artificial intelligence techniques can now comb through these vast datasets precisely, identifying patterns and insights that were once beyond reach.
The limitations of qualitative research include the following: not being sufficiently understood and accepted in the scientific community from time to time due to its different paradigm and process; difficulties in dealing with intensive qualitative data, labour-intensive, and time-consuming analysis process, requiring a meticulous process and management; weak explanatory and generalizing power; and more dependability of the analysis and interpretation processes on the individual skills of the researchers, therefore, it is not easy for the researchers to take the scientific distance in the process and is more prone to personal biases and idiosyncrasies (Anderson, 2010; Queirós et.
Credibility also involves the researcher's views and actions.
Transcription Once gathered, the next challenge awaiting the qualitative researcher is to get the material assembled into codable form.
In bipartite graph theory, a (ActivityType) in Germany in the year 2011.
The data modeled in EXIOBASE is from 2011, while relevant data from YSTAFDB for this specific year was available only for flows and activities related to phosphorus.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691612459058 Portage Network.
The mobility associated with this approach also allows for interviews to be conducted in situ where research participants have visual cues they can use as they explain how particular events occurred and/or explain their behaviour or choices, which we speculate will enhance both the comprehensiveness of recall and its validity.
[60] © 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
Glaser kept on focusing on the earlier concept and remained consistent with it, the one he discovered with the Strauss.They defined grounded theory as ‘...a method of discovery, treated categories as emergent from the data, relied on direct and, often, narrow empiricism, and analysed a basic social process'.
What the design researcher designs is a treatment, that is, ‘a desired interaction between the artefact and the problem context' and he defines design as ‘a decision about what to do'.
Qualitative analysis, which is inherently complex and multifaceted, begins with fieldwork and involves a carefully planned sequence of activities: conducting interviews, transcribing recordings, reading transcriptions, retrieving phrases, coding text and images, analysing data and visualising it.
Living the Questions: A guide for teacher-researchers.
(2016) further recommend the development of a "common collectively exhaustive ontology"
(2015) the Flow was not divided into economic or biosphere flows.
It is clear that this tinkering by QDA researchers indicates they are too derailed by QDA to learn systematic GT procedures.
What is qualitative inquiry and what are forms of qualitative data?
4.1.2 Interviews The type of interviews range from structured, semi-structured, open-ended, face-to-face, telephonic, one-on-one, computer-assisted interviews, group interviews, and focus group interviews etc.
If the framework/ model was not created during the design process, it is presented for the first time in this step.
Methodologist Uwe Flick (2014, 2019) holds advanced degrees in both psychology and sociology; Lillemor Hallberg (2006, Hallberg & Strandmark, 2006) served as the first editor of the International Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health and Well-Being and conducts research as an expert in nursing research and psychology, and psychiatrist Suzan Joon Song (Song and de Jong 2013) has special training in the psychology of trauma and in medicine.
Open coding allows the analyst the full range of theoretical sensitivity as it allows him to take chances on trying to generate codes that may fit and work.
Gregory Hadley (in Charmaz 2020, 168) describes the usefulness of Glaser and Strauss's analysis of death and dying in hospitals.
Artefact ontology (technical artefact - conceptual overview).
Digital Media Though reading an interviewee's exact words can convey a great deal of meaning, the text alone lacks a complete representation of the participant's response.
Narratives can be written in the following three sections in reporting: ‘Contextuality and reflexivity' in the Methods section, where the primary researcher narrates how they experienced the qualitative research process with its contextual dimensions.
The field of digital qualitative research is becoming a rapidly growing multidimensional and multifaceted research area.
In qualitative studies, which prioritize experience and proceed through research problems determined within the framework of existing theories, holistic phenomena/situations are handled in their own quality and singularity within intersubjective interaction and transformation (intersubjectivity).
And further to find out the complexities of the situation through a holistic framework.
The possibility of linking data to the Semantic Web using a common ontology improves the findability, accessibility, interoperability, and reproducibility of data.
In arguing that grounded theory inductively emerges from data, Glaser and Strauss have been criticized on the grounds that they advocate a "Baconian" inductivism.
4.1.1 Selection of Participants Basically, Sampling is a method of deducing information about whole population instead of going to measure every unit of the population.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
He further stressed upon this point that the research questions and purposes should be align with the sample, if not then it needs further development.
For symbolic artefacts like a software program, the make plan (the blueprint) and made object (the code) can be one and the same.
Classes and properties can have subclasses and subproperties.
In this way, with two to three separate readings, each specific to a main context, more focused, in-depth, and finegrained analysis of the text will be possible through these layers; themes and sub-themes will be determined context-specifically.
Grounded theory methodology received its first systematic formulation in Barney Glaser and Anselm Strauss, The Discovery of Grounded Theory (Chicago: Aldine, 1967).
This revealing of method muddling (see BAKER, WUEST, & STERN, 1992) of procedures does a tinkering rescue job, © 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
(7) Tolerate ambiguity while you struggle to gain intimate familiarity with the empirical world and to create an analytic handle to understand it.
Will the culminating portraiture be published to the web, CD-ROM, DVD, or other venue?
Grounded theory research begins by focusing on an area of study and gathers data from a variety of sources, including interviews and field observations.
Atchison had an opportunity to use this technique most recently in his in-person interviews with clients of sex workers, which allowed him to conduct interviews in true conversational style in pool halls, moderately busy lounges or cafes, or while walking about busy city streets.
Existing ontologies for process-based environmental LCA do not share a common foundation with other database structures or tools used in industrial ecology (such as material flow or input-output analyses) (Pauliuk et al., 2016).
Once started, analyst soon learns where ideas are likely to integrate best and sorting becomes generative and fun.
In GT, relevant theoretical codes emerge in conceptual memo sorting and could be "whatever." While the fourfold property space is a good tool, when emergent, for conceptualizing types (see GLASER & STRAUSS, "Awareness of Dying," 1965), it is not for placing or sorting participants, a priori, nor for counting them.
Our first experiment using DNS for transcription involved simply inputting a taped interview to the program for transcription.
Look for all possible theoretical explanations of the data and check them.
For example, mapping provenance in the ontology increases transparency.
Theoretical sampling really makes grounded theory special and is the major strength of grounded theory because theoretical sampling allows you to tighten what I call the corkscrew or the hermeneutic spiral so that you end up with a theory that perfectly matches your data.
It also runs the risk of clouding the researcher's ability to remain open to the emergence of a completely new core category that has not figured prominently in the research to date thereby thwarting the theoretical sensitivity.
See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
(3) Fit: Does the theory fit the substantive area?
As the 9 of us headed to the other room, his wife Mrs.
A core ontology for modeling life cycle sustainability assessment on the Semantic Web Agneta Ghose1
(2016) stressed the necessity for thriving communities of practice.
Professionals should proactively seek, analyse, and utilise such input as a driving force for methodological refinement and overall growth.
For example, data from World bank on GDP per capita could also be annotated using BONSAI ontology.
296) that an interpretivist approach depends upon both, the participant's view and the researcher's view of reality, so that the researcher can...
An artefact like "the Diesel engine" is a universal (1stOT in MLT [6] - with artefact a 2ndOT category) that has a design specification consisting of a (at least one) make plan, a (at least one) use plan and a capacity specification.
Thus, as a source of encouragement and support, the collaborative process presents itself as a means of learning and enrichment, in which the sphere of collaboration does not supplant the sphere of action of the individual.
SPARQL query Check BONSAI SPARQL endpoint (http://odas.aau.dk) for complete list of queries and live results
The issue of data ownership varies for qualitative researchers across institutions, and within different jurisdictions.
That's basically quota sampling or sampling on demographic characteristics.
The time and burden to prepare materials for storage is high for qualitative researchers and participants.
Theoretical Issues in Ergonomic Science 11 (6):532-45.
In practice, we can uncover the differences in interpretation, clarify ambiguous rules, identify ambiguity in the text, and ultimately quantify these coders' final level of agreement.
Quality criteria from the literature guided their interviewing, such as establishing a comfortable, private, and quiet interview setting build ing rapport and emphasizing with the interviewee; taking the role of an interested learner; active listening; using open-ended questions and avoiding leading questions; probing; and adopting a non-judgmental approach (e.g., King & Horrocks, 2010; Kvale & Brinkmann, 2009; Seidman, 2006).
Once the voice is converted, a third filter is applied to the new voice to slow down the rate of speech to 20-30% of the original rate so that the speech is clean and methodical.
(2015) was a source of inspiration in drafting the BONSAI schema.
A software program at binary level is to be read by a processor, and the intended effect is a change in the internal memory of the computer.
• Integrate the designed artefact in the artefact network (aggregation dimension) and in the artefact classification (identify type and distinguish it from siblings) • (for the design researcher) Aim at developing techno-scientific models of domain artefacts
This is just a fact...students who attempt grounded theory but cannot tolerate confusion and regression, and who need to continually feel cognitively in control, fall by the wayside.
The theory of explanatory coherence, then, offers the grounded theorist an integrated account of many of the evaluative criteria deemed important for theory appraisal by Glaser and Strauss.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)
In order to do so we first develop a basic, yet comprehensive ontology that covers the core concepts in LCSA.
Another option would be to actually begin or end an interview by putting the respondent through the training process, the basic version of which only takes about 15 minutes.
For his web-centered project on the clients of sex workers, Atchison developed a second network-based sampling strategy that he refers to as "viral recruitment." Viral recruitment does not require the researcher to first identify and contact a member of the target population.
Narrativity Individuals, teams, and organizations construct their individual, professional, and organizational meaning-makings, realities, professional identities, and organizational cultures through narratives of their contextual and reflective experiences (narrative construction of reality, self, and professional/organizational identity).
This example represents the first step in the evolutionary process of moving from print media into hypertext environments.
Ontologically, the relationship between artefact and design specification is one of inherence (the former cannot exist independently from the latter).
Volume 1, Number 1 Spring 2005 Edited by: Karen Swan Editor
The sorted list is created so it is a textual technical object.
Similarly, web pages once required designers to be proficient in scripting html.
As the theory grows, becomes reduced, and increasingly works better for ordering a mass of qualitative data, the analyst becomes committed to it.
The growing evidence suggests that digital tools are invaluable in bolstering collaborative efforts and refining the qualitative research process.
Its effectiveness depends (use condition) on the shared language and shared education in reading/writing.
Qualitative Research in Digital Era: Innovations, Methodologies and Collaborations.
The essential in grounded theory is that theory will be developed inductively from data'.
Beyond the decisions concerning initial collection of data, further collection cannot be planned in advance of the emerging theory.
Later, when the GT's main concern emerges and is explained in a generated theory, it will have relevance for professional concerns.
This systematic approach enhances the rigour and credibility of qualitative analyses and bridges the divide between qualitative and quantitative methods.
Just as the construction of a scientific paper is really the continuation of research rather than a narrative account of that research, so a philosophical reconstruction of a method is a bona fide construction rather than a trustworthy guide to the original formulation of the method.
"Process" is a commonly used as a synonym in other LCA databases.
The replication crisis and qualitative research in the psychology of religion.
Ensuring robust digital data security has become pivotal in the era of datafication and digitisation, particularly in CAQDAS and qualitative research.
This lumping of GT with other QDA methods prevents GT from standing alone as a transcending general research methodology.
Believing of the wrongness with self as a result of Eric: Yes, and it made me believe there was something wrong being bullied; Feeling self-worthlessness; Being with me, that I was stupid.
(2013) developed an analysis of processes involved in becoming a victim of school bullying and in extricating self from it' (Charmaz 2014, 141).
Interchangeability produces saturation of concepts and their properties, not redundancy of description as some QDA methodologists would have it (see MORSE, 1995, p.147).
Such potential benefits are not risk- or cost-free.
We might be seen as an interesting case study in that regard, and probably represent the two major groups who might consider our suggestions.
The oppression of Latina mothers: Experiences of exploitation, violence, marginalization, cultural imperialism, and powerlessness in their everyday lives.
Stimulated in part by work in cognitive science, the methodology of discovery is now receiving the research attention it deserves.
These innovative solutions might range from new data visualisation techniques to implementing machine learning algorithms in qualitative research.
5 https://github.com/orgs/BONSAMURAIS/people 6 https://odas.aau.dk 7 https://github.com/BONSAMURAIS/yasgui-query-interfa-ce
software could be included in our undergraduate and graduate curriculum the same way that SPSS is.
We also claim that always some element of a design can be isolated and give rise to new artefact types.
The list of categories for coding is further delimited through theoretical saturation.
cessity but also informs ethical research practices, ensuring that participant data is treated with the utmost respect and integrity throughout the research process.
Codes Metaphors Potential themes Contextual elements, features How it relates to the context
I thought if protects self from embarrassment and teasing I didn't stand out, if they wouldn't notice me, then they wouldn't bully me.
Our next step was to exploit the fact that the program knew each of our voices by making us the medium through which the interview was taken from digitized audio file to transcript.
In accordance with the pragmatistic view of knowledge and knowing, underlying the constructivist grounded theory approach (Charmaz 2006, 2014; Thornberg 2012), Thornberg et al.
Example: Query on EXIOBASE for "Cattle farming" in Australia PREFIX <Specify namespace of ontology used.
Teacher and student perspectives on computers in the elementary classroom.
Instances of activity types and flow objects in YSTAFDB corresponded either broadly or narrowly to instances of an activity types and flow objects in EXIOBASE.
The grounded theory perspective: Conceptualization contrasted with description.
(2013) exam ined how individuals, who had been victims of school bullying, perceived their bullying experiences, and how these had affected them.
In this approach, where individuals and teams are accepted as actors with will, it is more appropriate to talk about co-framing and co-transforming, where the context and actors transform each other in contextual experience processes that progress through ‘mutual interaction and transformation' rather than the linearity and determinism (non-linear and nondeterministic approach) of the natural, structural, sociocultural, or contextual (Gülpınar, 2021).
interview ‘provides a unique opportunity to uncover rich and complex information from an individual' (Cavana et al., 2001, p.
2018a, 2018b) might be daunting, but it is propelled forward by these researchers' innate curiosity and analytical prowess.
for the Semantic Web to support the dissemination of data and results to researchers who are unfamiliar with the terminologies used for different methods.
A measure to which the numeric value representing the measure of a Flow is expressed in proportion to.
Applicability, in turn, can be connected to generalizability (cf., Larsson 2009), and Glaser and Strauss (1967) proposed four interrelated criteria: (1) Fitness: The ‘theory must fit the substantive area to which it will be applied' (p.
As we entered, we showed our coats and cards to the attendant at the appointment desk.
The resources and training that currently exist do not sufficiently address the concerns associated with qualitative research; many questions, dilemmas and ethical problems remain.
Journal of Educational Computing Research, 17(1), 79-102.
The appearance of Strauss and Corbin (1990, 1998) immensely popular
London, Thousand Oaks California, New Delhi: SAGE Publications.
In most cases, it is an analysis/design model of a non-technical artefact, for instance, a university domain consisting of students, enrollments etc., that wants to build an IS.
Sustainability assessment tools are data intensive and require synthesizing data from a variety of sources (Kuczenski et al., 2016).
March, S., Smith G.: Design and natural science research on information technology.
Glaser and Strauss avowed that deductive quantitative research assumed that researchers knew the ‘right' questions to ask before beginning their studies.
After single or multi-layered advanced reading and analysis, taking into account the outputs refined in step six, the research team comes together and finalizes the conceptual/theoretical framework of the study.
These approaches of grounded theory share what Charmaz (2006, 2014) terms as positivist definitions of theory: theories that seek causes, and stress explanation, prediction, generality, and universality.
Classic GT is not what these "adopted QDA" usages would call GT.
Developing a guideline for reporting and evaluating grounded theory research studies (GUREGT).
At the same time, in this step, if multiple/ layered reading and analysis will be carried out over two to three contexts in the next advanced analysis phase, these layers will also be visualized.
When this is done, theories are generated, with the help of interpretive procedures, before being finally written up and presented.
For example, a survey that included questions about sexual behaviour might ask early in the process what word or phrase the respondent would prefer to use when describing sexual intercourse, and from that point on any question that dealt with intercourse could incorporate the respondent's preference into its wording.
"Comprehension is achieved in grounded theory by using tape-recorded, unstructured interviews and by observing participants in their daily lives.
The more controversial the topic and/or analysis is, the more data the researcher needs to persuade skeptical audiences.
After March & Smith's (1995) initial classification of artefacts in terms of models, constructs, procedures and instantiations, there have been only a few attempts to come up with a more systematic approach.
This looming risk is amplified by the surge of digital research techniques demanding advanced computational knowledge.
International Journal of Business and Management; Vol.
In contrast, Glaser (2013) still assumes that data are unproblematic and insists researchers must not preconceive analyzing them by invoking earlier concepts, perspectives, and studies.
The researcher works on the social parameters in addition to the quantitative measures in the study.
The green rectangle is a datapoint instance from a dataset annotated based on the ontology.
The digitisation process in research and analysis showcases the diverse strategies inherent in qualitative research and highlights ethical considerations concerning data privacy, consent, and transparency.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press
2.1 Evolution of Grounded Theory Since the grounded theory development in 1967 by Glaser & Strauss, it's in the process of amendments by its instigators and others academic researchers for the last four decades.
Details on the primary classes and predicates in the BONSAI ontology are given in Tables 1 and 2.
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)
The use plan specifies at least in which events and under which use conditions the object can be used to achieve which intended effect.
The intended outcome of this type of research does not consist of new artefacts, but of knowledge on the use properties and the effectiveness of some artefact type (e.g.
It is important to realize that reliability of data forms the basis for claiming that phenomena exist.
What are the input flows to an Activity in a given time and location?
‘A paradigm is a framework or a set of assumptions that explain how the world is perceived where ‘the paradigm of a science includes its basic assumptions, the important questions to be answered or puzzles to be solved, the research techniques to be used, and examples of what scientific research looks like'(Neuman, 1991, p.
is that design research should broaden its narrow scope from building/evaluating an isolated technical object in some delineated time span, at some place towards a holistic view on technology development.
As such, they are continually tailored to fit the data and are applied judiciously at the right point and moment in the analysis.
The position of these two is at the heart of the design.
Qualitative studies have a paradigm that is different from quantitative research and its paradigm ontologically, epistemologically, and methodologically.
The query results in the label of the source title "Copper and zinc recycling in Australia - potential quantities and policy options" and its identifier doi "10.1016/j.jclepro.2006.06.023"
It emphasizes prioritizing narratives over existing
Enhanced infrastructure and engagement in data storage and sharing can promote new research questions and encourage diversity in analysis (Chauvette et al., 2019), it can enable other researchers to build upon, expand, and critique existing analyses, and it can be used for teaching and learning purposes, to support trainees' development and exposure to diverse forms of data and approaches to analysis (Haaker & Morgan-Brett, 2017; McKiernan et al., 2016; Tamminen et al., under review).
These attributes are necessary because they enable the researcher to wait for the conceptual sense making to emerge from the data.
However, this widely held view fails to distinguish between data and phenomena.5 The failure to draw this distinction leads to a misleading account of the nature of science, for it is typically phenomena, not data, that our theories are constructed to explain and predict.
The ascendency of digitality and digital technology is fundamentally altering the practice of qualitative research and computer-assisted data analysis.
They follow the tradition of postmodernism, assuming that media plays a crucial role in forming personality, culture, and social order; they diverge significantly from analogue critical theory.
In a very real sense, stating the problem is half the solution!
From virtual interviews to AI-assisted transcription and beyond, the scope of what is possible in research has been expanded manifold, leading to more prosperous, more nuanced insights.
Psychologists Henwood and Pidgeon (2003) raised a crucial point 17 years ago about grounded theory that still holds today.
Identify attributed capacities together and analyze the relationship between inherent and attributed capacities.
To overlay this QDA program on GT severely remodels GT to its deficit.
The purpose is theoretical elaboration, saturation and verification of concepts, densification of concepts by developing their properties and generation of further concepts.
Based on the RDF framework, we defined classes, hierarchies, and properties for terms and attributes identified as relevant for LCSA.
This should make the data and results understandable and accessible to a wide range of research domains.
These observations bring together three elements: (a) digital technologies and the many opportunities they provide both to do new things that the qualitative research community has never done before, as well as to do better the things that it has always done; (b) the social dynamics that have been triggered, fostered, and fed by digital developments, most notably the colonization of the Internet, and the implications these have for sampling and solicitation; and (c) observations regarding some possible implications of these social and technological developments for qualitative research in the academy.
The start is not blocked by a preconceived problem, a methods chapter or a literature review.
This article emerges from the intersection of two domains: (a) qualitative research, with all its diverse and illustrious history, and (b) the digital age, which is now most clearly upon us.
For an application of the computer program PI see Paul Thagard and Keith Holyoak, "Discovering the Wave Theory of Sound: Induction in the Context of Problem Solving" (Proceedings of the Ninth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Los Altos: Morgan Kaufman, 1985), 610-12.
A third researcher may be engaged to ensure consensus at this point, and expert opinion may be consulted to refine the decisions.
Annotating non-balanceable flows is also possible since every Flow is a subclass of measure.
* The contact person for this White Paper is Katherine Tamminen (katherine.tamminen@utoronto.ca); other authors are listed in alphabetical order by last name.
Furthermore, it can be analytically problematic to remove contextual information from datasets in which experiences and interactions are understood.
Preconceiving theoretical codes such as typologies or basic social processes (BSPs) is not GT.
Because they do not know in advance where grounded theory may take them, they need to do a systematic search of the literature as they complete their study.
Although one would hope that, if such a situation arose, one's university would zealously engage the legal battle required to safeguard research confidences, and both the research participants and academic freedom their existence protects, thus far, the record of Universities doing so is less than perfect (e.g., see Lowman & Palys, 2000, 2001; Palys & Lowman, in press; Rusk, 2012).
For example, the class of FlowObjects were given a very broad definition that encompasses natural and manufactured physical assets, intellectual, human and social network assets, as well as financial assets.
When answering quantitative social scientists' sharp criticisms of its quality, Glaser and Strauss rejected the common practice of evaluating qualitative research according to the tenets of the quantitative tradition.
Phase I: initial readings and analysis Step 1 - pre-reading and analysis.
The Journal for the Research Center for Educational Technology is published twice a year by RCET (http://www.rcet.org).
Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five traditions.
Qualitative research and computing: Methodological issues and practices in using QSR NVivo and NUD*IST.
The GT researcher does not know in advance what will be found.
eral research domains, the use of the Semantic Web has been relatively limited with respect to sustainability assessments.
Book Review: Distance Education: A Systems View, 2nd Edition Rosemary Du Mont
How to recognize a "quality" grounded theory research study.
See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
A technical object has attributed capacities 1 that are realized in the use.
The elementary method of conducting research was quantitative, but recently, qualitative method of research has also gained momentum among researchers.
Physically remote, single-interest bonds can be difficult to sustain, and few of us have access to the resources required to develop those relationships in person.
This IS application is what is used by the human agent according to its use plan (the prescribed user interaction) to generate and transform data objects in the organization.
Again, finding GT procedures in this description is hard.
Mezirov), Activity Theories (Cultural-Historical Activity Theory), Actor-Network Theory, Flow Theory (Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi), Situated Learning, Emotional Singularity, Community of Practice, and Cognitive Load Theory.
References Anderson C (2010) Presenting and evaluating qualitative research.
It puts the effort to understand and interpret them at the centre.
Prior to the use in calculations, disparate ReferenceUnits for flow measures within the same Activity may be harmonized by transformation into measures for which the ReferenceUnit is the same amount of determining flow of an Activity.
https://doi.org/10.1002/per.1919 Chauvette, A., Schick-Makaroff, K., & Molzahn, A.
Software is probably the most expensive element of the equation; we have mentioned several in passing-NVivo, Adobe Soundbooth, Dragon Naturally Speaking, Abbyy Fine Reader-which can total several thousand dollars, even with educational pricing.
Specifies a flow object produced or consumed by an activity for which a change in demand or supply will affect the activity level (such as its production volume or extent)
Critical personal narrative and autoethonography in education: Reflections on a genre.
The methodological framework is qualitative approach and further in qualitative research, this type of study is focused on ‘grounded theory approach' as it is conceptual thinking and theory building rather than theory or hypothesis testing (Glaser & Strauss, 1967), which is usually done in quantitative research approach.
For example, the predicate "bont: hasDeterminingFlow" was defined as an "owl: ObjectProperty" and a "owl:FunctionalProperty." Object property refers to predicates that link two different IRIs.
Indeed, the rise of digital methodologies has opened the door to many qualitative digital possibilities.
THEORY APPRAISAL The dominant empiricist account of theory appraisal is characterized in normal hypothetico-deductive fashion, whereby theories are assessed for their empirical adequacy by ascertaining whether their test predictions are borne out by the relevant data.
Research designs in the literature for qualitative studies include narrative study, action research, participatory action research, ethnographic study, phenomenology, grounded design, and case study.
I have already written in detail much about GT procedures in "Discovery of Grounded Theory" (GLASER & STRAUSS, 1967), "Theoretical Sensitivity" (GLASER, 1978), "Doing Grounded Theory" (GLASER, 1998a), "Basics of Grounded Theory Analysis (GLASER, 1992), "More Grounded Theory Methodology" (GLASER, 1994), and "The Grounded Theory Perspective" (GLASER, 2001), all by Sociology Press.
TA B L E 1 Classes introduced in the BONSAI ontology aligned to the Semantic Web Here "bont:" is the suggested prefix for the namespace for the BONSAI ontology IRI1
This is a useful distinction to start with, as long as we do not conflate again the "meta-artefacts" (their terminology) on the abstract design level with design knowledge about these artefacts.
Ontological interoperability refers to linking of the core ontology to existing semantic ontologies.
paper, disk block), a content (the attributed capacity) and an intended use.
Using the ontology, we give a working example of integrating and querying open access data relevant for sustainability assessments in the Semantic Web.
NLP, a subset of artificial intelligence, enhances the analysis by facilitating automated sentiment and topic evaluations.
DSR artefacts must have at least a certain level of rigor and generalizability, as well as practical and scientific relevance.
Jones, D., & Gregor, S.: The Anatomy of a Design Theory.
After three minutes, which seemed like an infinite time to everyone in the room, our specialist asked them why they had visited.
Grey circles refer to the OM ontology used to define units and measures; classes in the blue circles refer to the OWL time ontology to define temporal extent of data; class in yellow refers to Schema ontology used to define geographic location of the datapoint.
As we delve deeper into the digital age, digitisation, collaboration, and relationality unmistakably define the essence of contemporary computeraided qualitative data analysis and qualitative research methodology on a broader scale.
In what context do the parties experience emotional experiences?
Via focused instrumental and cultural interventions, researchers can fully harness the transformative potential of these technologies, aligning with the prevailing trends of datafication, digitisation, and collaboration that underpin computer-assisted qualitative data analysis and qualitative research methodology.
While digital tools have made it easier to bridge geographical divides, they also require a solid collaborative spirit to ensure smooth teamwork, even when teams are globally dispersed.
Inserting images and linking digital audio and video files can be the next step in painting a more intricate and multi-dimensional description of the environment under study.
Ethics is pivotal in the digital age, accompanied by unique data privacy and transparency challenges.
Researchers have been accused of possessing blind spots in matters of using media to convey their evidence and assertions (Fischman, 2001).
This article discusses opportunities that now exist that we have experimented with and implemented in our own research, such as viral sampling strategies, wireless interviewing, and voice recognition transcription, as well as impediments we have encountered that stand in their way.
[26] also mention the "pattern" as artefact, but the pattern has multiple levels.
It takes the view that grounded theory is best regarded as a general theory of scientific method concerned with the detection and explanation of social phenomena.
The journey of theory development in grounded theory approach starts and ends with the data.
For example, any dataset related to sustainability assessment converted into RDF would be a resource.
The presented technical solutions help overcome the challenges and support the development of open data infrastructures for sustainability assessments.
With a paramorph model, the source that is modeled from is quite different from the subject being modeled -- developing theories that invoke generative mechanisms to explain distinct effects requires that this is the case.
Through such a process, the focus of the research, the research questions, and the conceptual framework are refined and further refined through reflection and reorganization of the qualitative study.
Educational ethnography past, present, and future: Ideas to think with.
Similarly, using SKOS ontology was useful to annotate interoperability between the two datasets.
Without sorting, a theory lacks the internal integration of connections among many categories.
Common examples of BalanceableProperty are Mass and A measure that follows a conservation law.
in the form of a method library, than end products.
process models used in IS design (part of use plan).
However, it is critical to remember that traditional research methods remain vital even with these new digital tools.
They help the analyst maintain the conceptual level in writing about concepts and their interrelations.
These three classes were selected as they define the core concepts of datasets commonly used for sustainability assessments without being too specific for a given assessment tool.
Grounded theory: Obejectivist and constructivist methods.
Once the characteristics of hypertext are employed to enhance qualitative studies such as portraiture, exploring other types of digital possibilities follows swiftly.
Primary Health Care Research & Development cambridge.org/phc
Harris and Leslie Irvine and is a co-editor of the Handbook of Current Developments in Grounded Theory with Antony Bryant.
Finally, a narrative can also be written at this stage.
Another related term is online collaborative research, which refers to research conducted openly and collaboratively, often leveraging online platforms and communication tools.
The fatigued inflection of a third graders voice as she talks about the time required to create a word-processed document or a teacher's passionate response concerning technology's relationship to other aspects of schooling are examples.
Traditional methods of theory testing are now complemented by insights gleaned directly from the vast amounts of data processed using digital tools.
The doors were locked because someone kept poking their head in.
Such an environment also gives the reader more choice in how the research is examined and evaluated.
This can be seen in social and news media discourse (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, blogs, peer-to-peer TV/Internet networks, Netflix platforms, open-source software, etc.).
In this direction, the following two points should be added to the analysis process: what are the ‘contextual characteristics' in the text (i.e.
Tired of waiting for Computing Services, Palys's department decided to invest in six leases for its own graduate computer lab so that he can teach the program in his graduate qualitative methods class.
The process is carried out by reading, analysing, and interpreting the narratives related to the experience that is the subject of the research separately through two to three selected contexts in a layered and therefore more nuanced and in-depth manner.
But this suggestion fails to appreciate that one typically initiates an investigation with an ill-structured problem, and that this illstructured problem is developed in the course of inquiry.
The literature meta-analyses of the contemporary field of qualitative research (Qualitative Domain Ontology) show that the development of CAQDAS over the last three decades is reflected in the currently dominant narrative qualitative methodology (Bryda et al., forthcoming).
Social network sites: Definition, history, and scholarship.
In fact, however, most such theories are in a seriously underdeveloped state, and the unfortunate result is that researchers unwittingly submit low content theories to premature empirical testing.
The classes defined in green circles are classes specific to the BONSAI ontology.
The interview data will be transcribed and analysed through coding and constant comparison process, keeping in view the constructivist grounded theory approach.
An effort is made to handle, explain, generalize, predict, and control the de-contextualized situation.
Each function characterizes an archetypical IT application.
Not only for building these systems, but also for these systems themselves to reason about their environment.
If design is taken in the traditional engineering sense, then it only has a limited applicability in management.
2017; Gibson, 2016; Lee 2018; Scull, Mbonyingabo, and Kotb 2016; Tsai, L.
Big Data and new digital technologies help researchers focus on finding causes by looking at related data.
The process begins with line-by-line open coding of the data to identify substantive codes emergent within the data.
Nardon L, Amrita H (2021) Sensemaking through metaphors: the role of imaginative metaphor elicitation in constructing new understandings.
Collaborative analysis of qualitative data seems to hold a variety of effects, from a more informed, complex, or helpful digitally supported qualitative data analysis leading to new interpretations, transcending present knowledge, or creating possibilities for
The principle adopted to develop the BONSAI ontology was to ensure it was general enough to be operational and usable in different domains of industrial ecology, without adhering excessively to a specific framework.
The emergence of cloud computing and web-based platforms has expanded the possibilities for collaboration beyond geographical boundaries, enabling researchers to connect and collaborate globally.
The violet rectangles refer to instances of ActivityTypes and FlowObjects from EXIOBASE
Similarly, we annotated ActivityTypes by combining "subsystem name" and "process name." Besides FlowObjects and ActivityTypes, we represent also the unit and direction (input or output) of flows .
1.2 Research Design 1.2.1 Qualitative Research Design ‘We can never achieve a complete ‘scientific' understanding of the human world.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press
However, we regard that as belonging to language ontology, which is different from - although presupposed in - an information object/text ontology.
"The ER model" as introduced by Chen is an artefact.
We selected terminologies for primary classes such as Flow, Activity, and Agent.
For instance, qualitative researchers utilise it to gather, plan, and analyse substantial volumes of qualitative data from several teams in an international project (Robins and Eisen 2017) and support analytical awareness and reflexivity (Woods et al.
Such a shift exposes traditional social sciences, such as sociology and anthropology, to the potential risks of becoming overshadowed.
Ergo GT is drawn into the QDA multi-method world and eroded by consequence, however unwittingly.
Similar definition of theoretical sampling has been reported by Strauss and Corbin (1998, p.
Three final research products are used to illustrate and support the assertions of this study, and excerpts from these products are included within this manuscript.
As one of the key tasks in developing digital research infrastructure in Canada concerns the training and retention of highly qualified personnel, resources should be allocated to the training and retention of HQP with expertise in qualitative research.
In essence, the future of qualitative research hinges upon a harmonious blend of traditional methodologies
Savilla Banister Dodi Hodges Bowling Green State University Abstract This study investigates how various methods of using digital technologies can support qualitative study.
With respect to interoperability of the datasets, we tested the similarities between EXIOBASE v3 and YSTAFDB.
Hence, they argued that immersion in the research and theoretical literatures before conducting research would sway researchers and subse quently, preconceive their studies.
To ensure transparency and interoperability of datasets, earlier studies suggested the possibility to link the ontologies to the Semantic Web (Janowicz et al., 2015; Pauliuk et al., 2019).
Using digital tools in qualitative social science research is not necessarily new but appears to be steadily increasing, highlighting the growing trust and reliance on these tools.
However, this proposal provides no escape from linear thinking; it simply points out that the steps constituting a linear progression need not occur in one fixed order.
'Epistemology in ethnography: Assessing the quality of knowledge in human factors research.
CAQDAS TM Lab, Institute of Sociology, Jagiellonian University, 31-007 Kraków, Poland Research Centre on Didactics and Technology in the Education of Trainers, Department of Education and Psychology, University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal; apcosta@ua.pt Correspondence: grzegorz.bryda@uj.edu.pl
The literature review shows that collaborative analysis and research can be carried out on three primary methodological levels: interdisciplinary (Makel et al.
[53] 3.9 Core variable As the researcher proceeds to compare incident to incident in the data, then incidents to categories, a core category begins to emerge.
Journal of the Research Center for Educational Technology (RCET) Vol.
From its beginning to the present, grounded theory has addressed questions about quality in qualitative research.
Kroes, P., Meijers, A.: The dual nature of technical artifacts, Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 37(1): 1-4 (2006).
Some voice concerns, citing epistemological and methodological reservations against swift digitisation and Computer-Assisted Qualitative Data Analysis Software.
We have to bully him even more!' So, the best thing was to be quiet and not be noticed.
Maybe the issue is that I'm interested in an activity regardless of the actor.
Our ontological analysis confirms the centrality of most artefact types mentioned by March & Smith, but with several nuances.
Once Jennifer Lois (2010) realized her questions of homeschooling mothers focused on quantity of time instead of quality, she gained resonance by hearing their stories from a new standpoint and revising her questions.
Many researchers without formal training in IT or computer sciences find themselves on a steep learning curve.
Retrieved from http://www.amazon.com/Nursing-Research-Generating-Assessing-Evidence/dp/1605477087#reader_16054 77087 Punch, K.
Thousand Oaks, London, New Delhi: Sage Publications.
In a phrase, ‘looks legit to me.' The intensity of prospective participants' search should serve as a reminder to researchers that they should be careful about their online persona, and that they should expect their behaviour and reputation to come under critical scrutiny.
Qualitative data sharing and re-use for socio-environmental systems research: A synthesis of opportunities, challenges, resources and approaches.
Turning to us, he said, ‘Come on friends, what are you waiting for?
Bleakley A, Cleland J (2015) Sticking with messy realities: how ‘thinking with complexity' can inform healthcare education research.
She is lost in accurate fact research, which is moot for GT.
There's nothing wrong with starting out that way but that's your first step.
Thus the analyst must pace himself, exercise patience and accept nothing until something happens, as it surely does.
Based on these three concepts, a framework for the analysis, interpretation, and reporting of qualitative data was developed.
US & Australia: John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd Charmaz, K.
What are the qualities of the role models that emerge in these narratives?
For example, each new "Class" in the BONSAI ontology refers to the construct "owl:Class" as defined by the OWL ontology.
240) stressed on the element of representation that sample is ‘a small set of cases a researcher selects from a large pool and generalizes to the population'.
The medium frequency areas of Calgary, Edmonton, and Ottawa accounted for 13.33% (n=60) of the posts (an average of about 20 posts per area).
The confusion of QDA requirements and GT procedures, in this example, makes it hard to follow and clearly erodes GT by default remodeling.
Conceptual and theoretical basis of the model The three core concepts of the model are ‘contextuality', ‘reflectivity', and ‘narrativity'.
3, 305-327 https://doi.org/10.1080/14780887.2020.1780357
In general, contextuality is mirrored in this model in the following ways: The first implication for qualitative data analysis is to transform the reading and analysis of qualitative data into a contextual one.
If the analyst skips this stage by going directly to sorting or writing up, after coding, he/she is not doing GT.
They are situated in their social, historical, local, and interactional contexts.
This ensures that projects progress seamlessly, even in dispersed digital environments.
An artificial object is a physical object intentionally or unintentionally created or adapted by humans.
Clark Glymour, Theory and Evidence (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980) criticizes the standard hypothetico-deductive account of confirmation and proposes a bootstrapping alternative.
In the US their selves became further fragmented, as they experienced ‘discrimination, disrespect, loneliness, and self-doubt' (p.
Portraiture in HyperText This study examined a particular school improvement initiative within a small, Midwestern elementary school.
Like the term core concept (Corbin and Strauss 2015; Glaser 1998), ‘double victimizing' was indeed the most significant and frequent code, and was related to as many other codes as possible and accounted for more data than other categories.
In our own departments, for example, PhD students of all stripes are recognizing what a useful tool NVivo can be for managing the literature when they are preparing for comprehensive examinations and writing papers and proposals.
Despite the strong ties that have developed among some members of the network, the majority of members appear to be peripherally related to these cliques through occasional participation in group conversations or chats, or through their interaction over the sharing of their sex-buying or -selling experiences.
http://www.ed.uiuc.edu/EPS/PES-Yearbook/95_docs/haig.html (3 of 11)8/4/2006 9:04:24 AM
While, Strauss (1987) moved the method towards verification, rather than focused on the earlier version of grounded theory.
Memo writing is the intermediate step between coding and writing the first draft of the paper, including the provisional analysis.
The implication for artefact design is that it always involves integrating a new artefact into the existing network, and this integration is an ongoing process as the network evolves continuously.
Sorting is essential-it puts the fractured data back together.
In conclusion, understanding these five areas is paramount as the lines between technology and qualitative research become increasingly intertwined.
Contemporary qualitative research is no longer limited to small interviews but calls for concerted cooperation among researchers.
This term is inspired by Nicholas Negroponte's book, "Being Digital," drawing parallels with the concepts of modernity and post-modernity (Negroponte 1996), especially with the Digital Society approach.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Such a conceptual/theoretical framework transforms qualitative data analysis, interpretation, and reporting processes into processes that are carried out with a reflective approach within their specific contexts.
Risks and costs, like the benefits, are derived from the confrontation of diverse perspectives and research methodologies.
"To be of use": Enhancing the utility of qualitative research.
In the example, Carbon dioxide causes Global Warming; "causes" is a property that defines the relation between class Emission (Domain) and Environmental Impact (Range) ∙ Literal: Resources whose values are not IRIs, for example, strings, numbers, and dates.
CAQDAS software is divided into three groups: licensed programs equipped with many advanced and exciting analytical functionalities, open-source tools that usually have a basic range of functionality, and online programs that are functionally advanced to varying degrees.
However, a distinct disparity in the grasp of analytical and IT skills is evident among many in the field (Mertens et al.
Instantiated systems [23] are not artefacts in our ontology, but evaluation studies of these technical objects (or
Interview Data Interviewer: How did the bullying affect you during this period?
©1996-2004 PHILOSOPHY OF EDUCATION SOCIETY ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
In every case there are threats that theoretically can be envisioned: the telephone might be wiretapped, the kitchen might have a bug in it, but the likelihood of this threat being realized in most cases ranges from remote to non-existent.
This online journal (http://www.rcetj.org) seeks to provide unique avenues for the dissemination of knowledge within the field of educational technology consistent with new and emergent pedagogical possibilities.
In this digital age, audiences are not just passive interpreters of the content; they actively create new content, influencing and shaping the behaviours and perspectives of others.
What are the ontological and epistemological assumptions, and what do these mean for the research process, researcher position, findings, and quality issues, including transferability?
The computer also allows you to offer questions in virtually any form-we have experimented with having questions in text, audio, and video-and, depending on the hardware, to enable responses by text, audio, video, or touch, and thereby surveys can be adapted to virtually any category of population, including the illiterate and those who have any number of visual or motor impairments.
Along with the datafication and digitisation of qualitative research and greater collaboration, their methodology is changing, adapting to the dynamic nature of the digital age and the language of data analysis and research practices (digital/online methods, virtual ethnography, hypermedia methods, and so forth), which requires clarification and classification to ensure consistent understanding and application among researchers.
[19] for a discussion of different interpretations of the term "design thinking").
Introduction to social research: Quantitative and qualitative approaches.
In this case, Glaser and Strauss's extensive research shows how they achieved a useful level of generality.
Theoretical sampling is purposeful sampling but its purposeful sampling according to categories that one develops from one's analysis and these categories are not based upon quotas; they're based on theoretical concerns.
The power of constructivist grounded theory for critical inquiry.
Software and digital tools such as CAQDAS empower researchers by streamlining the transcription process, enabling collaborative research, and supporting the development of robust qualitative analysis models.
And finally, we would be remiss if we did not also mention the resistance we have found among some members of the qualitative research community who use their computers for email and word processing but view the prospect of digitalizing data and engaging it with qualitative software as somehow sacrilegious.
(3) Generality: The theory needs to be sufficiently general to increase its applicability - ‘categories should not be so abstract as to lose their sensitizing aspect, but yet must be abstract enough to make .
?flow bont:hasObjectType / rdfs:label ?FlowObject .
In developing the digital research infrastructure for qualitative researchers, it is imperative that the infrastructure is built, implemented, and supported in a manner that is accessible by researchers across a variety of disciplines.
The March and Smith proposal has been broadly accepted.
Combining these elements adds a dimension of realism that strengthens the trustworthiness of the text.
SCIENTIFIC METHOD In breaking with methodological orthodoxy, grounded theory has been subjected to a considerable amount of criticism, principally on the grounds that the approach signals a return to simple "Baconian" inductivism.
Moreover, the implementation of these technological and procedural safeguards must be transparently communicated to participants, ensuring that they are fully aware of how their data will be protected throughout the research and beyond.
individual learning or improving new analytical skills (Cornish et al.
As such, constant comparative analysis, problem emergence, theoretical sampling, theoretical saturation, conceptual emergence, memoing, sorting, etc.
It is critical that the analysis is done independently by at least two researchers (credibility).
A pluralist view of generalization in qualitative research.
Ontologies or schemas enable machines and people to work in cooperation (Prud'hommeaux & Seaborne, 2008).
For instance, whereas external victimizing consists of the social processes of stigmatizing by being labelled as different and social excluding, internal victimizing includes a sense of not fitting in, distrusting others, self-protecting, self-doubting, self-blaming, and resignation.
Indeed, the digital realm offers numerous avenues for expressing and disseminating information.
However, documents transcribed digitally can now be made available in small, easily transferable files.
‘A set of values and techniques which is shared by members of a scientific community, which act as a guide or map, dictating the kinds of problems scientists should address and the types of explanations that are acceptable to them'(Kuhn, 1970, p.
In contrast to March & Smith's general design science approach, Iivari's classification is more specific to the IS domain, but it also lacks ontological analysis.
According to [29:82-83] IT artifacts ‘have both technical and social design features and are therefore better regarded as SocioTechnical (ST) artifacts'....‘We define the IT artifact as a sociotechnical assemblage.' As pointed out, among others, by Alter [2], we should be cautious with terms like socio-technical artefacts or ensemble artefacts, as if there are also other artefacts that do not have social design features.
Rather than read the researcher's descriptive synthesis of a phenomenon, e-readers can view the phenomenon, as it unfolds.
It is just straightforward conceptualization integrated into theory-a set of plausible, grounded hypotheses.
[69] Sorting also has a conceptual, zeroing-in capacity.
The forcing, preconceived notions of an initial professional problem, or an extant theory and framework are suspended in the service of seeing what will emerge conceptually by constant comparative analysis.
They are key to developing concepts, empirically measuring or observing concepts, and using data analyses.
Conducting interviews in the comfort of participants' homes fosters deeper intimacy.
One of our "digital culture" core beliefs is that digital networks encourage excellent connectivity, collaboration, communication, community, and participation.
Another example is Bio2RDF, a network of coherent linked data across life sciences databases such as PubMed, NCBI, Gene Ontology, and Dbpedia (Nolin et al., 2008).
However, most of these will not be within the IS domain, just like microelectronics falls outside the domain at the other side.
Implications for Sampling The possibility of using social network sites as sources of data is well known (e.g., Boyd & Ellison, 2008; De Bruyn & Lilien, 2004; Zimmer, 2010), but their potential utility for participant recruitment is not.
To this end, grounded theory is reconstructed as a problem-oriented endeavor in which theories are abductively generated from robust data patterns, elaborated through the construction of plausible models, and justified in terms of their explanatory coherence.
Narrativity and reflectivity can be translated into qualitative study processes in several different ways.
Researchers need extensive programming skills to convert, integrate, query, and explore the data and knowledge sources.
When we go from the level of signs to the level of texts, then some texts are again
Currently there exists an artificial division of data based on the different methods adopted in industrial ecology.
Some members of the network have formed friendship cliques that engage in regular social interactions that sometimes extend beyond the boundaries of the virtual community to real world meetings over beer or attendance at annual community parties.
But by the 1960s, quantitative researchers had attacked and marginalized qualitative inquiry in sociology by gaining control over leading departments, journals, research institutes, and funding agencies.
They describe organizations as social artefacts that evolve over time in unpredictable ways.
Rather than refer merely to "settlement," saying the Internet has been "colonized" acknowledges that settlement patterns have reflected the particular gendered, cultural, economic, and political interests of divergent hegemonic groups.
(2001).Applied Business Research: Qualitative and Quantitative Methods (1st ed.).
The temporal emotion work of motherhood: Homeschoolers' strategies for managing time shortage.
https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.psychsport.2009.02.006 Tamminen, K.
The first graphical web browser in 1993, and the accompanying wide-scale release of Netscape Navigator in 1994, along with the growth of commercial Internet Service Providers (ISPs), led to an explosion in the public use of the World Wide Web (WWW or the Web).
This effort to understand starts with the process of analysing qualitative data and continues with the writing of findings in reporting.
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
In this process, sophisticated audio software such as Adobe Soundbooth is used to apply a series of specially designed sound filters to digitally recorded files.
It is up to the GT researcher to figure out what data they are getting.
Quality in constructivist grounded theory: checklists and guidelines
For them, grounded theory research should meet the accepted canons for doing good science (consistency, reproducibility, generalizability, etc.), although these methodological notions are not to be understood in a positivist sense.
The BalanceablePropertyType defines the quantity of the measure defined in the BalanceableProperty.
Posting frequency was based on priority and traffic levels with the higher frequency areas of Vancouver, Toronto, and Montreal comprising 34.22% (n=154) of the posts made (an average of about 51 posts per area).
Tamminen, Faculty of Kinesiology & Physical Education, University of Toronto Heidi Bohaker, Department of History, University of Toronto; Co-Director of the Great Lakes Research Alliance Andrea Bundon, School of Kinesiology, The University of British Columbia Denise Gastaldo, Bloomberg Faculty of Nursing, University of Toronto Brenda M.
At Simon Fraser University, for example, every single computer in every single lab on campus-hundreds and hundreds of computers-has SPSS on it, and faculty at the university are able to download the program for free as part of the university's lease arrangement.
[48] Open coding allows the analyst to see the direction in which to take the study by theoretical sampling before he/she has become selective and focused on a particular problem.
Measure to which all flow measures are proportional to (per CO2 eq., per capita)
A review of the literature in one research field indicates that there is very limited engagement in open science practices, and researchers conducting qualitative studies are using a digital research infrastructure in very limited ways (Tamminen & Poucher, 2018).
Interviewer: You said before that you thought they bullied you because there was something wrong with you.
What version of grounded theory have you adopted and why?
Interactive Techniques While the role that a capable interviewer or observer plays in the quality of data gathered can never be overstated, a tremendous advantage that digital technologies offer the data-gathering process is their ability to free up more research time by increasing comfort, maximizing efficiency, and minimizing error.
Full interview (127 pages) and observation (66 pages) transcriptions (in pdf format) were also provided.
How and in what ways does the context in which clinical experiences are lived affect PIF?
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 8 (1), 76-84.
The GT conceptindicator model requires concepts and their dimensions to earn their way into the theory by systematic generation of data.
Sampling decisions are required not only about which people to interview or which events to observe, but also about settings and processes.' He further added that the sampling plan and sampling parameters are interrelated with the purpose of the study and research questions of the study.
Once gathered, the data are analyzed using coding and theoretical sampling procedures.
For a formulation of inference to the best explanation in terms of explanatory coherence see Paul Thagard, Conceptual Revolutions (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992).
The question is whether the word (path-creation) design is appropriate and in what sense the organization is a social artefact (cf.
This includes a deep dive into how technological transformations influence our lives, such as private and social interactions, education, governance, democratic processes, and business.
Undoing the blocks to GT by this default remodeling will not be an easy task given the overwhelming confusion that has resulted and seems destined to continue to grow.
We strongly advocate that researchers gain a deep engagement with their method and data.
Restructuring incentives and practices to promote truth over publishability.
Retrieved 11 May, 2013, from http://www.amazon.com/Foundations-Qualitative-Research-Interpretive-Approaches/dp/1412927412#reade r_1412927412 Wolcott, H.
A model proposal for qualitative data analysis, interpretation, and reporting: contextuality, reflectivity, and narrativity Mehmet Ali Gülpınar
Foundations of Qualitative Research: Interpretive and Critical Approaches.
The lively classroom discussions that ensued from this activity reflected the authentic nature of the experience.
More and more researchers are addressing the social, cultural, political, anthropological, and other dimensions of Computer-Mediated Communication (CMC) or using CMC to generate, collect, and analyse field data.
Drechsler, A., Hevner, A.: Utilizing, producing, and contributing design knowledge in DSR projects.
This artefact may survive when individual copies have been destroyed.
Balanceable properties are particularly are-volume, number of units, Becquerel (unit to relevant for validating the completeness and consistency measure radioactivity).
This data is also interlinked with several other semantically linked databases such as Geonames (geospatial information database), BiSciCol (biodiversity database), OpenEI (U.S.
The association for the study of medical education.
Once these elements are introduced, the writer can also look to webpage design and CD-ROM/DVD development to build research narratives that allow readers to more completely examine the connections of the data and researcher extrapolations.
The distinction artificial object/natural object does not necessarily exhaust the complete set of endurants.
the research more visible, interesting and interactive.
Additional examples can be found in www.odas.aau.dk Table 4 provides a comparison of the BONSAI ontology with existing ontologies used to structure data for sustainability assessment.
Instead, this strategy requires that the researcher only know "how" to target the population and to construct a solicitation that appeals to them.
It is a set of carefully grounded concepts organized around a core category and integrated into hypotheses.
} as ?z) } What is the determining flow for specific activity?
Such questions were typically derived from speculative theorizing far removed from the empirical world.
As the woman picked up her purse, our doctor looked up for the first time and smiled at the couple and told them they could sit down.
Ethics and Information Technology, 12(4), 313-325.
[8] Currently it appears to be very popular in QDA research substantive and methodological papers to label QDA as GT for the rhetorical legitimating effect and then to critique its various strategies as somewhat less than possible or effective; then further, to sanctify the mix of methods as one method.
Three qualitative studies incorporating digital technologies in collecting, converting, categorizing, analyzing and presenting data are examined.
Theoretical Sampling Theoretical sampling is an integral part of the grounded theory approach as it lead the researcher what to collect next.
Keywords: Computer-assisted, qualitative, viral sampling, voice recognition, ethics, information management, CAQDA, NVivo Author Note: An earlier version of this article was presented as a keynote address at the 10th Annual Advances in Qualitative Methods Conference of the International Institute for Qualitative Methodology held in Vancouver in October, 2009.
is the methodology through which researchers can query, retrieve, integrate, and analyze data and knowledge from multiple sources on the Web without the requirement on the part of the researchers to download and manually integrate those sources (Kamdar et al., 2019).
For the macro-framing of qualitative work, there are approaches with different ontologies and epistemologies (understandings of reality and knowledge) and foci, such as internal/ cognitive constructivism, sociocultural constructivism, and structuralism; existential, experiential, phenomenological, and interpretivist/hermeneutic approaches; and narrativity, complexity, socio-material, Marxist, feminist, and critical approaches.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1609406918823863 Facey, M., Gastaldo, D., Gladstone, B., & Gagnon, M.
Focused coding expedites the analytic process while retaining your strong foundation in the data.
When he saw us, he cheered up and invited us into the room with a smile.
Using our extensive analytical and research project experience, the last research results, and a literature review, we try to show the impact of new technologies and digital possibilities on our thinking.
In fact, by adopting a particular account of scientific problems, AEI method is able to explain how inquiry is possible, and at the same time provide guidance for the conduct of research.
After reviewing previous work, this conceptual paper introduces an ontology of IS artefacts.
Conversely, others view this as an opportunity to innovate in qualitative research and enhance their methodological and analytical prowess.
She watched as we all took turns crowding into a stuffy room.
In EXIOBASE, examples of ActivityTypes are "Cultivation of wheat" or "Aluminum production." In YSTAFDB, examples of ActivityTypes are "societal consumption" or "fabrication and manufacturing."
As in the famous Ship of Theseus example, it is possible to change a part (replace a plank) while the ship keeps its identity.
As noted by Charmaz (2014), their focused codes provided the makings of a frame for the later analysis.
Moreover, databases are periodically updated, which requires the researcher to personally follow up on how the changes in the new database version influences their models.
One of the most useful characteristics of this type of publication is the access to a broad readership.
‘[Theoretical Sampling] rather than being predetermined before beginning the research, evolves during the process.
Digitality helps to research without time and space limits, offering researchers unprecedented flexibility and reach, blurring between quality and quantity-on the way to digital mixed methods.
The use of digital possibilities in qualitative research practices shapes the researcher's identity and their analytical and research workshop.
Iivari, J.: A paradigmatic analysis of information systems as a design science.
This integration of technology and research opened up novel avenues, challenging traditional paradigms and forging new directions.
Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.
While grounded in data, the conceptual hypotheses of GT do not entail the problems of accuracy that plague QDA methods.
We cannot study every case of whatever we are interested in, nor should we want to.
Expanding the dialoguing capabilities within an online journal can provide a venue for a richer exchange in exploring a qualitative study.
For example, "Cultivation of wheat" in Germany in the year 2020 or "Aluminium production" in China in the year 2020.
Limitations and or challenge of proposed model With its different paradigm, design, and implementation process, conducting qualitative research has various challenges and limitations.
238), and they emphasized that the theory needs to fit the data under study.
UFO does not split up the world of substantials into artificial and natural, but into agents and objects; and distinguishes social objects from physical objects.
?flow bont:hasObjectType / rdfs:label ?FlowObject .
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)
Introduction While qualitative studies are heralded for their collections of rich data and their abilities to enhance our understandings of the dynamics embedded in complex educational settings, they are often suspect, as well.
American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education 74 (8), 141-148.
Recruitment of sex buyers: A comparison of the efficacy of conventional and computer network-based approaches.
The intertwining of GT with preconceived conjecture, preconceptions, forced concepts and organization, logical connections and before-the-fact professional interest defaults GT to a remodeling of GT methodology to the status of a mixed methods QDA methodology.
Example: Query on YSTAFDB to identify the provenance for the flow for Copper production "production, Cu" in Australia PREFIX <Specify namespace of ontology used.
In the broader perspective, integrating digital tools into qualitative research is not a mere convenience but a necessity.
Rather, data analysis is a process that requires astute questioning, a relentless search for answers, active observation, and accurate recall.
15309290, 2022, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jiec.13220 by Cochrane Uruguay, Wiley Online Library on [18/06/2025].
Increasingly, researchers ask for transparency and reflexivity as criteria of quality in qualitative research (e.g.
In his further development of grounded Glaser (1978, 1998) suggested four criteria in judging quality: (1) Workability: Does the theory work to explain relevant behavior in the substantive area of the study?
manuals claimed to give researchers instructions about how to do grounded theory.
properties could be converted to balanceable properties with additional information, for example, the density of an instance of flow can be used to convert its volume to mass units.
An angular, sharp language, and discourse over power
Any digital recordings then could be input into DNS and auto-transcribed.
Currently there is a steep learning curve to understand and use Linked Data and Semantic Web technologies for researchers not accustomed to these models.
I thought if I didn't stand out, if they wouldn't notice me, then they wouldn't bully me.
*Must include flow compartment to define if the entity belongs to biosphere or technosphere.
Ethical issues and sensitive data: Some data should not be made available for re-use In some cases, the sensitivity of the research topic and the data is heightened, such that there are risks to participants if data were made available to other researchers for re-use.
The practice of weaving together the audio from an interview, with video footage of an event being discussed, while simultaneously including the researcher's written interpretations, creates a vibrant research artifact.
Women growing older with environmental sensitivities: A grounded theory model of meeting one's needs.
Talk of reliabilist justification for the detection of phenomena brings to mind the important methodological notion of robustness.6 This notion, which has long been considered important in science, carries with it the idea that there need to be multiple means for establishing the nature and existence of phenomena.
Emphasizing the pivotal role of digital tools, this article delves into the evolution of computer-assisted qualitative data analysis.
They guide the © 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
Such information could be extracted and stored as triples unrelated to the BONSAI ontology, if desired by developing expansions of the core ontology.
Following the full suite of GT procedures based on the constant comparative method, results in a smooth uninterrupted emergent analysis and the generation of a substantive or formal theory.
These innovations drive economic progress, enhance the quality of life for individuals, and boost efficiency across diverse sectors, from education and health services to transportation, energy, agriculture, manufacturing, retail, and public administration (Schallmo and Tidd 2021).
However, this structuring was not in relationship to the Semantic Web.
Strategies of multiple determination are important because they are the major means by which we establish the reliability needed to justify claims about phenomena.7 Strauss speaks briefly of robustness as a desideratum for grounded theory, but in a way that is different from the notions that are generally considered in science; besides, his focus is on notions of robustness that are theories rather than phenomena.
Barriers to adopting emerging technologies in education.
and sample size are each depends upon the unit of analysis (Cavana et al., 2001).
This account of problems is deployed within a general abductive theory of scientific method in Brian Haig, "Scientific Problems and The Conduct of Research," Educational Philosophy and Theory 19, no.
[3] In this paper I will take up the conceptual perspective of classic Grounded Theory (GT).
Correspondence: Shahid N Khan, Department of Management, Monash University, Australia.
15309290, 2022, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jiec.13220 by Cochrane Uruguay, Wiley Online Library on [18/06/2025].
This occurs, for example, with our customary practice of validating theories through null hypothesis significance testing, and it frequently occurs when more complex statistical regression methods are used to test causal models.
To enable and support the uptake of semantic ontologies, we present a core ontology developed specifically to capture the data relevant for life cycle sustainability assessment.
Exploratory research is usually conducted for exploring the constructs and fields when limited information and research is available on the subject area (Cavana et al., 2001).
In this way, exploring the possibilities offered through digital technologies can give qualitative researchers a broader and deeper palette from which to create their portraitures.
artificial objects: a shell can be used for drinking water, stars can be used to navigate on sea.
It is important to do this process by taking into account the research problems.
Our aim is to integrate their work with the Design Science Research perspective, such as described in Section 2, and ground it in the foundational ontology UFO [15].
While instant messaging technology had always existed in the form of IRC, the new GUI interface made this form of online communication even more appealing to a wider array of network technology users.
Let us consider the example of an Entity Relationship diagram.
[45] 3.4 Use of the literature It is critical in GT methodology to avoid unduly influencing the preconceptualization of the research through extensive reading in the substantive area and the forcing of extant theoretical overlays on the collection and analysis of data.
The provision of adding provenance to a dataset allows data users to verify information on when or how the data was produced.
Research inherently presents challenges and opportunities, making adopting collaborative strategies highly beneficial.
Similarly, other scholars have been inspired by the potential of web-based collaboration and have used terms similar to those employed in this study.
Rudd RA, D'Andrea LM (2015) Compassionate detachment: Managing professional stress while providing quality care to bereaved parents.
Using this approach, developers concentrate on mapping and reuse of existing ontologies further developing it to suit a given application.
In the realm of virtual interactions, active listening becomes vital.
https://www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/136.nsf/ eng/home Haaker, M., & Morgan-Brett, B.
Conducting the literature review after developing an independent analysis'.
This method of recruitment generated 72.6% (n=584) of questionnaire participants and produced 35 telephone or email inquiries about the research.
The purpose in sampling is to generate categories and their properties.
As anyone knows who has seen a teenager speedily texting with both thumbs on their cell phone, there appears to be a preference among some members of the current generation of computer users to communicate via chat-direct or text messaging.
Simon, H.: The Sciences of the Artificial (3rd edition), MIT Press.
This expansion, fuelled by digital advancements, has paved the way for more general applications in traditional qualitative research, encompassing narrative methods, interviews, and textual and visual content analyses.
364) who mentioned the most important points as a guideline to conduct structured interviews.
A proper characterization of the interacting components that comprise AEI method would require a formulation that is systems-theoretic rather than linear.
In order to acquire a sample of clients of sex workers, a notoriously difficult population to locate and engage, Atchison employed a targeted-network recruitment strategy that involved approaching members of the community directly through advertisements placed within a variety of region- and topic-specific online newsgroups that sex buyers used to locate sexual service providers.
The result is a rich, dense theory with the feeling that nothing has been left out.
Simon's The Sciences of the Artificial [30] focused on computers and artificial intelligence software viewed as artificial objects.
Part 2: Human participant research data risk matrix.
Although we understand that some persons are more technologically interested than others, in our view the kinds of tools and techniques we have discussed are simply part of an ever-diversifying qualitative research landscape, and an inevitable part of its future.
An example of an analysis using this template is also presented in Table 2.
The class Flow contains the measure of an entity that is produced or consumed.
The research shift is from individuals to societies, individual to collective thinking, and single behaviour to social patterns, without limiting the number of study participants.
The clear issue articulated in much of the literature regarding qualitative data analysis (QDA) methodology is the accuracy, truth, trustworthiness or objectivity of the data.
In 3.4, we focus on text artefacts, and in 3.5 we define DSR artefacts.
In contrast, GT substantive theory always has general implications and can easily be applied to other substantive areas by the constant comparative method of modifying theory.
This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (https://creative commons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
Digital Data in Qualitative Research: Strengthening the Visibility and Credibility of Portraiture Article · January 2005 Source: DOAJ
This "computational turn" describes adopting new techniques and methodologies from computer science and its associated fields.
[72] The analyst carries forward to subsequent sorts the use of each concept from the point of its introduction into the theory.
Researchers must harness these tools since digital networks empower extensive expression and content dissemination.
Exploring congruence between Habermasian philosophy, mixed-method research, and managing data using NVivo.
Hypertext and PDFs In the past it was not feasible to include full transcriptions of interview or observation notes as appendices in qualitative studies (and some would argue that this type of disclosure is still not desirable).
For example: Carbon dioxide (subject) causes (predicate) Global Warming (object).
All data extracted as triples was stored in OpenLink Virtuoso Triplestore.
In-person or purely computer-administered surveys also can be 357
Incidents sampled may be similar or different, positive or negative.
Selective coding begins only after the analyst is sure that he/she has discovered the core variable.
Memos are theoretical notes about the data and the conceptual connections between categories.
Irrespective of the fact, that both approaches have their own strengths, the most important thing in considering methods for inquiry is based upon the research requirements and research objectives (Cassell& Johnson, 2006; Cavana et al., 2001).
See query 1> DESCRIBE ?dataset FROM <Specify IRI of dataset, See query 1>
Especially when they move forward in the data analysis process from general analytical strategies used in qualitative research to more specific approaches for different types of qualitative data, including interviews, text, audio, images, videos, and so-called virtual data, by discovering the domain ontology of the qualitative research field, we see that there are more than twice as many different classes of data analysis methods as qualitative research methods.
Video 1: Technical Support for Classroom Computers
Rich data means an openness to the empirical world and a willingness to try to understand the experiences of people who may be far different from you.
However, ensuring data security in these collaborative platforms rests with the researchers or the analytical tool providers.
Atchison, for example, has taken advantage of network communications technologies, such as text messaging, online discussion boards, and social networking sites (e.g., Facebook and Twitter), to develop recruitment strategies that build on the fact that modern network technology and communications are designed explicitly for the rapid transmission of information among and between members of distinct social networks (for a more detailed discussion see Kolar & Atchison, 2012).
Consider first a non-textual artefact like the Diesel
For example, psycholo gists Qin and Lykes (2006) provide an excellent analysis of the convergence of meanings and actions.
[61] Memo writing is a continual process that leads naturally to abstraction or ideation -continually capturing the "frontier of the analyst's thinking" as he/she goes through data and codes, sorts and writes.
They define, it as ‘an executable description of a system behavior'.
Their advantage, as opposed to licensed and open-source ones, is an extensive range of flexibility that enables the development or implementation of new algorithms and analytical techniques based on programming languages.
Complexity of the paradigms present in quality criteria of qualitative research grids.
[24] Here is a good example of extensive lacing of GT by QDA needs.
At this time, your review will be focused on the ideas that you have developed.
For example, an IKEA manual that helps the customer to assemble a cabinet (the manual instantiates a make plan).
The more striking of these "noteworthy discernible regularities" are sometimes called "effects." Phenomena comprise a varied ontological bag that includes objects, states, processes and events, and other features which are hard to classify.
• Focus not on building an artefact, but on designing an artefact (where designing includes the evolution of the design).
Gülpınar MA (2024) Triple approach to program evaluation and "contextual program evaluation model" proposal.
To think otherwise is to take a positivist position...theories are interpretations made from given perspectives as adopted or researched by researchers.
The International Journal for the Psychology of Religion 29:278-91.
Conversely, an emerging trend integrates computer-aided qualitative data analysis with methods from the digital humanities, natural language processing, and text
Qualitative method is used to understand people's beliefs, experiences, attitudes, behavior, and interactions.
Have the concepts been examined under a broad range of conditions and do they offer several dimensions?
67) further cited in his book (Howard Becker, Tricks of the Trade) as...
Phase III: advanced reading, analysis, and framing Step 6 - advanced reading and analysis.
This typically takes place as part of a work system or business process practice.
But, it becomes even more visible and tangible in the computer-aided analysis of qualitative data software, which is becoming more collaborative, systematic, and interactive.
To bridge this chasm, a dualpronged strategy is essential.
quicksort (Fig.3), is an artefact that is instantiated in all its executable representations (text objects conforming to the algorithm artefact).
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
Data Gathering Intranet- and Internet-Based Techniques Although perhaps of less interest to persons who engage solely in traditional qualitative research, those who engage in mixed-methods research also may be interested to know about some of the possibilities we have pursued in the realm of intranet- and Internet-based survey research.
Evaluate the artefact on the basis of its built instances in their use context to accumulate design knowledge.
Currently, while LCSA- relevant data exist on the Web, such data is fragmented in isolated sources (e.g., in relational databases, or flat files such as spreadsheets) not always openly accessible.
Further the face-to-face interview allows the researcher to deeply observe the participant for any non-verbal communication but also allows both the interviewer and the interviewee (participant) to clarify the ambiguities and necessary points.
http://www.ed.uiuc.edu/EPS/PES-Yearbook/95_docs/haig.html (11 of 11)8/4/2006 9:04:24 AM
Journal of the Research Center for Educational Technology (RCET) Vol.
(common thinking) into global understanding (scientific thinking).
Understanding this variation, and how different cultural and subcultural groups and networks use these virtual spaces to create and define their social identities, is a prerequisite for qualitative researchers hoping to benefit from the accessibility of these meeting spaces.
15309290, 2022, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jiec.13220 by Cochrane Uruguay, Wiley Online Library on [18/06/2025].
Vermaas, P., Kroes, P., Poel, van de, I., Franssen, M., Houkes, W.: A philosophy of technology: from technical artefacts to sociotechnical systems.
[9] © 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
Qualitative research and computing: Methodological issues and practices in using QSR NVivo and NUD*IST.
This effect can be specified more precisely if we consider a subset of technical artefacts that transform some input to some output - for instance, a coffee machine, a 3D printer, but also an application that transforms input data into output data.
As the analyst develops several workable coded categories, he/she should begin early to saturate as much as possible those that seem to have explanatory power.
A code gives the researcher a condensed, abstract view with scope of the data that includes otherwise seemingly disparate phenomena.
Topics to be addressed in digital research infrastructure training include:      
This highlights the interplay between technology and research methodologies.
The pursuit of quality in grounded theory Kathy Charmaza and Robert Thornberg
Provides the labels of 670 FlowObjects in YSTAFDB and the corresponding unit it is measured in
The most detailed specification of grounded theory procedures is presented in Anselm Strauss and Juliet Corbin, Basics of Qualitative Research (Newbury Park: Sage, 1990).
This approach embraces the principles of openness, inclusivity, and shared knowledge creation, allowing for greater engagement and participation from a diverse range of researchers.
She prefers to force the data, making it obey her framework.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)
All ideas must fit in somewhere in the outline or the integration must be changed or modified.
‘authenticity' (Creswell, 2012; Creswell, 2013; Cleland, 2015; Mann & MacLeod, 2015; McMillan, 2015).
Purao, S.: Design Research in the Technology of Information Systems: Truth or Dare.
Core variable, conceptual theory is far beyond QDA description or conceptual descriptions which are unending since they are not tied down to a conceptual scheme.
Constructivist grounded theory requires strong reflexivity throughout the research process.
The digital transformation has, in many ways, revolutionised the landscape of qualitative research.
The current generation of graduate students needs to know enough about what digital possibilities are available to them to make their own choices about the extent to which they want to pursue the options the digital world opens to them, and help develop the next generation of digital tools so that they are maximally beneficial for both researchers and participants alike.
Typologies are constructed by determining two significant characteristics and sorting participants against each characteristic on a 2x2 matrix.
3.3 All is data GT stands alone as a conceptual theory generating methodology.
2017; Gibson 2016; Scull, Mbonyingabo, and Kotb 2016; Tuason 2013), developing policy (Faija et al.
This is an iterative process in which the structure of the codes is dynamic and undergoes a continuous transformation with the researchers delving into semantic contexts and the semantic structure of data.
This challenging situation brings with it a new approach to education, healthcare, and health research: a holistic and contextual approach.
It is, therefore, more useful to characterize phenomena in terms of their role as the proper objects of explanation and prediction.
In the model proposed in this paper, a contextual, narrative as well as reflective approach is adopted.
Therefore the interview process seeks to elicit a participant's story, and this story is told sequentially as the events being reported unfold.
Wieringa's [37:29] definition is similar (‘an artefact is something created by people for some practical purpose'.
This theory is further split into two ‘versions' by its originators and that is called the Glaser's version (Glaser, 1978, 1992) and that of (Strauss, 1987; Strauss & Corbin, 1990, 1998) version.
Professionals should stay updated via regular workshops, webinars, and training sessions as the digital landscape evolves.
The research problems are reviewed for the last time and adjustments, if any, are made.
Early memos may include discussions of grounded theorists' codes, analytic and methodological questions as well as comparisons between fragments of data.
The Colonization of the Internet We use the term "colonized" to convey that the Internet has seen the creation of places that individuals and groups have marked and settled for their own social purposes.
ISSN: 1478-0887 (Print) 1478-0895 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/uqrp20
With this reading, the themes, dimensions and contexts agreed upon in the previous stage are checked, supporting and contradicting quotations/data are marked, revised if necessary, and new themes are identified, if any.
It is a move towards a more organic interpretation of data.
Opening to modern technologies in computer-based qualitative data analysis shapes our interpretation frameworks and changes the optics and perception of research problems.
Journal of Technology and Design Education, 27(4), 627-653 (2017).
suggested a few criteria for judging credibility: (1) a detailed and vivid descrip tion of data so the readers feel that they have been in the field as well, and literally can hear and see the participants; (2) readers' assessments of how the researchers came to their conclusions (what are the data and how have they been gathered and analyzed?); and (3) multiple comparison groups to increase the scope and generality of the theory, and to correct and adjust the emerging theory to diverse conditions.
The conversation can be organized in different ways.
Among different tools, environmental assessment tools such as life cycle assessment (LCA) has gained wide acceptance and is considered essential to perform a sustainability assessment (Troullaki et al., 2021).
"Datafication" pertains to converting various forms of information into a digital format.
In the genre of portraiture, where the researcher endeavors to paint a picture of an educational setting or phenomenon, these challenges require a solid investment of rigor and integrity.
Employing technological solutions to bolster data security, such as frequent software updates, the use of strong, unique passwords, and the application of encryption in data transit and storage, is not merely an operational requirement but also an ethical obligation.
This shift has moved from pen-and-paper data analysis to a reliance on complex digital tools and software.
About an hour later, a young couple entered the polyclinic door.
This virtual subversion of GT results in complex confusion of an otherwise simple methodology for novice researchers.
In addition, the reader also sees and hears the researcher during observation and interview settings, providing the opportunity to evaluate the researcher's impact on the environment.
Whether it can be seen as conforming to a (nontechnical) artefact "defense system type Y" requires in the first place that there is a design specification.
[58] Conceptual specification, not definition, is the focus of GT.
The discovery grounded theory: strategies for qualitative inquiry.Aldin, Chicago.
See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
First they lace it with some QDA requirements and ideas, which they then use to lump GT into QDA multi-method thought.
Nonetheless, grounded theorists can meet these markers of quality when researchers con duct thorough studies.
Unit of Analysis The most important part of any research is the unit of analysis as the whole research based upon the unit of analysis.
Sociological Practice: A Journal of Clinical and Applied Sociology, 2(4), 245-55.
As will be remembered, qualitative studies conducted on the institutional and social experiences of an individual, a team, or a particular community focus on the uniqueness and subjectivity of experiences.
We end by synthesizing our key points and offering a checklist and suggestions for conducting quality in constructivist grounded theory research, although most of the suggestions are applicable to other versions of grounded theory as well.
Similarly, we have developed multiple example queries to help researchers interested in extracting data as well as provide a template to develop new queries.
This fusion ensures that we are equipped with more effective, data-driven solutions to address the multifaceted challenges faced by contemporary societies.
(8) Does the theory stand the test of time and become part of the discussions and ideas exchanged among relevant social and professional groups?
(In some of the research literature, classic GT methodology has also been termed GLASERian GT although I personally prefer the term "classic" as recognition of the methodology's origins.) The conceptual nature of classic GT renders it abstract of time, place and people.
There may also be a need to specify more precisely such parameters that an Agent can have relative to an Activity.
The sorted memos generate a theoretical outline, or conceptual framework, for the full articulation of the GT through an integrated set of hypotheses.
The blocking problems come with the method mixing.
Journal of the Research Center for Educational Technology (RCET) Vol.
Pursuing this second suggestion, [38] proposes "theory" to be a relevant artefact type.
Example: Query on YSTAFDB if "Phosphorus in Food waste" an output of "Food processing" PREFIX <Specify namespace of ontology used.
Not having the visual distraction of the recording device present, not having to worry about being restricted spatially, and not having any obvious hardware that would draw third-party attention as if an "Interview in Progress" sign were hanging about their necks, combined to put participants at ease, which made it much easier to establish a trust and rapport that resulted in the typical interview lasting well over 2 hours.
The use condition of the IS application may be that there is a running computer network that builds on Internet; etc.
Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.
Even in cases where stringent restrictions could be put in place regarding the access and future uses of the data, there are some forms of data and topics of inquiry where the benefits of storing and sharing the data do not outweigh the risks to participants.
Conclusions Up to this point, most uses of computer technologies in qualitative study have concentrated on data management and retrieval.
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
"The UML object model" is a DSR artefact (see below for more discussion about models).
[17] CRESWELL (1998, p.86) says: "At the most extreme end of the continuum, toward the 'after' end, I place grounded theory.
Organizing these elements may be similar to the code and retrieve framework of digitally managing qualitative text data (Crowley, Harre, & Tagg, 2002; Richards & Richards, 1998).
Classic GT is a highly structured but eminently flexible methodology.
Cleland J (2015) Exploring versus measuring: considering the fundamental differences between qualitative and quantitative research.
As an open, generative and emergent methodology, GT provides an honest approach to the data that lets the natural organization of substantive life emerge.
Theory development is confused with QDA description thereby blocking GT generation of conceptual theory.
To keep the connection with both common sense and the technical sciences and to able to give substance to the design aspect, an artefact must have something of "an object made by humans".
In this process, sample quotations to be used in the report are also selected.
(2013) to gather vivid, rich, and comprehensive data.
International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 5(3), 193- 197.
Again, this type of data-sharing was once difficult, if not impossible.
individual's/ team's/ organization's own experience 3.
Ontology is a "formal description of concepts and relationships used to describe and represent data in a database"(Ragget, 2009).
The Gutenberg galaxy: The making of typographic man.
Memos slow the analyst's pace, forcing him/her to reason through and verify categories and their integration and fit, relevance and work for the theory.
It makes sense to see these components as tangible DSR outcomes, and the knowledge thereof as design knowledge.
Once a trusted member of the community deems the advertisement important or interesting, its transfer to further members of the community is exponential.
This new graphical user interface (GUI) in turn led to the creation of Internet forums or message boards, which rapidly replaced Usenets, e-lists, and BBSs as the preferred medium for members of virtual villages to meet and communicate.
However, this is not necessary, and, as we know, it is possible to describe software programs on various levels of abstraction, e.g.
In turn, the constraints that comprise our research problems provide AEI method with the operational force to guide inquiry.
TA B L E 2 Predicates introduced in the BONSAI ontology aligned to the Semantic Web Here "bont:," "time:" and "schema:" refer to the suggested prefixes for the namespaces for BONSAI ontology IRI1 , OWL time ontology1 , and the Schema ontology,2 respectively
In the pre-computer age, these executable representations had to be executed (on paper) by humans.
As can be seen in Figure 2, contextual reflective practices are continuous contextual and reflective processes of experiencing, reflecting on experiences and their contexts, re-contextualizing, re-framing, and re-experiencing.
I have said over and over that GT is not findings, not accurate facts and not description.
doi: 10.1017/S1463423624000562 Received: 28 December 2023 Revised: 5 July 2024 Accepted: 6 September 2024 Keywords: Qualitative paradigm; qualitative studies; research design Corresponding author: Mehmet Ali Gülpınar; Email: mgulpinar@marmara.edu.tr
We set-up the BONSAI SPARQL endpoint to query the datasets annotated using the BONSAI ontology.
This potential, which lies in processing vast amounts of data and identifying patterns at a pace unimaginable a few decades ago, adds a layer of depth to research.
Input or output of an entity to or from an Activity
This has led to discussions and confusion about the artefact status of information systems.
Nowhere does MORSE refer to the GT procedures of delimiting at each phase of generating, of theoretical completeness, conceptual saturation, core variable analysis, open to selective coding, memo banks, analytic rules, theoretical sorting, memo piles writing up, reworking and resorting, emergent problem, interchangeability of indices and theoretical (not substantive) coding.
The digitally managed research process requires an understanding of the impact of digital technologies on all aspects and phases of design, implementation, coding, and analysis and the dissemination of qualitative research results, which means considering both the advantages and challenges posed by these technologies.
This data can also be used as verification for the descriptions presented in the text.
Another aspect that we emphasize is the imbrication structure of the artefact network.
Criteria about the quality in qualitative research remain unsettled.
I felt that I really must be a boring-, a very boring person because everyone avoided me and because they teased me and because of all things they did to me.
Unfortunately, applying inter-coder agreement procedures often involves requirements or assumptions incompatible with the qualitative data analysis processes.
[5] © 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
The Information System, defined in this way, can be called a socio-technical system as it includes a technical component but also people.
In this regard, the present paper proposes a model for the analysis, interpretation, and reporting of qualitative data within the framework of contextuality, reflexivity, and narrativity.
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
These are only a few examples of cases where some data should not be made open and accessible for reuse; these examples fit the ‘extreme risk' classification (Portage Network, 2020) and "should not be deposited anywhere, beyond the direct storage and access needs of the research team" (p.8).
The proposal will be improved over time with the feedback of educational experts and users and will become more useful, thus contributing to the literature in this way.
(2019) plea for replication in qualitative research.
The result is a blocking of classic GT methodology and the loss of its power to transcend the strictures of worrisome accuracy-the prime concern of QDA methods to produce conceptual theory that explains fundamental social patterns within the substantive focus of inquiry.
However, considering the importance of the approaches and the fact that this is the first article in this direction, it is thought that these challenges will be overcome in time and that the proposed framework/model will become more useful for the general user with new research and articles in this direction.
In that case, the intended effect can be described in the form of the required input and the intended output.
In QDA work researchers are paced sequentially through the program and framework, and often driven to long periods of no product and exhaustion.
Glaser and Strauss's statement of grounded theory was revolutionary in the 1960s.
The importance of theoretical sampling is further elaborated by (Charmaz, 2003, 2006) that theoretical sampling plays an important role in getting pertinent data that is important in the process of emergence of theory.
Moreover, its tools aid in lexical searching, data retrieval, and comparisons, evolving into a comprehensive platform for researchers.
Therefore, narrativity has recently come to the forefront as a different approach in all fields from healthcare and education to change and leadership processes (Bruner, 1991; Bruner, 2006; Charon, 2007).
QDA leads to particularistic analysis based on discrete experiences while blocking the abstract idea of conceptualizing latent patterns upon which GT is based.
Provide various options for data security and access depending on the sensitivity of the data Different types of data and project materials may have different levels of sensitivity and require different levels of restriction.
Although the authors are right in stressing that design research should not just produce an instantiated artefact but contribute to theory [13], it is confusing to take this scientific theory to be the design artefact.
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
An Ontology of IS Design Science Research Artefacts Hans Weigand[0000-0002-6035-9045], Paul Johannesson[0000-0002-7416-8725] and Birger Andersson[] 1 Tilburg University, P.O.Box 90153, 5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands
This fusion allows for harnessing machines' computational power and precision with a nuanced understanding of human behaviour, facilitating deeper research explorations.
The CAQDAS R/Evolution: Bridging Technology with Tradition Throughout the history of qualitative research, a paradigm-shifting r/evolution has been led by CAQDAS.
Qualitative researchers must employ these digital tools and methodologies in the contemporary research landscape.
‘We cannot study everyone, everywhere doing everything.
Department of Management, Monash University, Australia
In contrast to Glaserian grounded theory but in line with Straussian and constructivist grounded theory, we
The subjects also have an empowering experience in the study.
Constraints that regulate the abductive generation of scientific theories will comprise a host of heuristics having to do with the explanation of phenomena.
These benefits combine to strengthen the genre of portraiture, by making the processes and products of this type of qualitative study more public and open to evaluation (Anfara, Brown, & Mangione, 2002).
Digital technologies offer an unusual, second-by-second picture of interaction over extended periods, providing information about relationships' structure, dynamics, and content (i.e., ego or social network analysis).
In this paper, we have proposed some important distinctions, in particular the distinction between a technical object (individual) and the artefact (universal) and the distinction between technical artefacts and non-technical artefacts.
Information regarding the ownership of qualitative data between researchers and participants requires thoughtful consideration.
For example, Palys sat on a federal committee that was charged with advising the Presidents of Canada's major granting agencies on prospective future development of their federal ethics policy-the Tri-Council Policy Statement on ethics in research involving human participants-where one issue that arose was whether any specific ethical guidelines were necessary for Internet-based research.
Coding and editing video footage is time-consuming and the researcher must remain committed to sharing the data that relates most to the research question(s), not the video data that is most visually appealing or anecdotally entertaining.
Given the ascending focus on QDA by sheer dint of the number of researchers engaged in qualitative analysis labeled as GT, the apparent merger between the two methodologies results in default remodeling to QDA canons and techniques.
Not everything requires servers and scripting, and Palys has the main prerequisite of being willing and educable on the use of new software.
During the analysis, I thought about how I relate to cultural and emotional situations during my own experiences in healthcare processes, how much I should or should not include them in the process, and my ambivalence at this point.
It is possible, for instance, to focus on the design conversation and turn it into an (text) artefact; or to design a tool to support the conversation; or to make the use plan the focus of design research, in the form of a use method.
Traditional qualitative methods including triangulation and member checking play a crucial role in focusing the image, but researchers still struggle to provide readers with enough evidence to convince them of the trustworthiness of the representation.
The design of the qualitative study is revealed by determining the most appropriate research design and methods among these.
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton Key words:
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
bullying depends on wrongness with self; I thought there has to be something wrong with me, Believing bullies' negative image of you; because otherwise they wouldn't have picked me as Getting bad self-confidence from being bullied; a victim.
There are bulk of books and research papers written by world renowned researchers and authors but the aim of this paper is to help the early stage researchers in conducting their projects in grounded theory approach.
From the comparisons of further incidents (indicators) to the conceptual codes, the code is sharpened to achieve its best fit while further properties are generated until the code is verified and saturated.
[37] GT stands alone as a conceptual theory generating methodology.
Writing memos is key to recording insight and facilitates, at an early stage, the development of theory." (MORSE, 1994, p.39 [27]
Features like data visualisation, collaboration support across time and space, and facilitating quantitative and qualitative methodologies make CAQDAS a prominent tool in today's research.
Further the author stressed and emphasised on the later version as it is getting more popularity and is more inclined towards constructivist approach rather than positivist approach.
An also very broad but different definition is expressed by Gregor and Hevner [14:4]: ‘We argue toward a more expansive view of the IT artifact to include any designed solution that solves a problem in context'.
The identified research problems are reviewed and re-defined.
The CAQDAS leads these technological advancements.
} Is a specific FlowObject an output from a specific Activity?
The same would be true of any technical vocabulary.
While similar responses might have occurred from the article in traditional print media format, the hypertext setting facilitates this type of dialogue by providing tools that are easy to use and accessible.
Such expanded scope is akin to opening a previously locked door in the mansion of knowledge.
Many of these sites also are in the United States, which brings us back to the USA PATRIOT Act.
By linking multiple databases, the data offered becomes more complete and precise and has allowed researchers to make advances, for instance, in drug development (Kamdar et al., 2019), content management in journalism (Raimond et al., 2017), and in web search engines (Lissandrini et al., 2015; Matentzoglu et al., 2013).
Although typically based on description, memos raise that description to the theoretical level through the conceptual rendering of the material.
Consensus on themes, determining main contexts, and dimensions: Researchers who independently determine codes and themes come together at this point and reach a consensus on the outputs.
Quality and trustworthiness in qualitative research in counseling psychology.
Scholars explored the immediacy and omnipresence of digital communication, the interactive and participatory characteristics of digital media, and the trend towards "shallow" information searches that are quick and surface-level.
3.A quick search of Elsevier publications in Science Direct on the Internet showed that over 10,000 authors or coauthors of grounded theory articles were linked to psychology departments.
An input or output of an entity to or from an instance of an An example of a Flow, in EXIOBASE would be the input of 2393 tonnes of "Aluminium and aluminum products" Activity or a directional exchange of an entity between (FlowObject) to "Manufacture of motor vehicles" two instances of Activity.
The contextualization of interpretation and meaning-making processes is another implication in this way.
Secondly, the paper continues to write that the program is not a physical object as it lacks a location in space - but why is code inside space and the baptized code suddenly outside space?
Contrary to the 1980s and 1990s, CAQDAS programs now include various functionalities dedicated to users in the humanities and social sciences.
They found negative judgments about qualitative inquiry that had long been evident in the discipline.
This approach appeals to researchers who (1) engage in reflexivity throughout the research process, (2) aim to make their standpoints, starting points, and research actions as transparent as possible, (3) read theoretical and substantive literatures on their topics before engaging in research, but do not necessarily take these literatures as true or final statements, and (4) assume every methodological approach, including grounded theory, assumes an epistemology.
Bezuidenhout J, van Schalkwyk S (2015) Developing the research question: setting the course for your research travels.
However, the assumption of symbolic interactionism that underlie grounded theory set the stage for examining process, for identifying stages and phases in the participant's experience.
The components are not necessarily more abstract than integrated systems, but more elementary.
Here I consider comments made about problems by Leonard Schatzman and Strauss in their Field Research (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1973).
Computer-based surveys also simplify contingency questions by allowing internal links from particular responses to whichever option most appropriately follows, thereby negating any possibility for respondent or researcher/administrator error by programming contingency sequences seamlessly and invisibly into the administration process.
International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education 19 (2):177-200.
Echoing the importance of collaboration, Davidson et al.
Will it be an electronic narrative which includes hyper links to elements of digital data?
While textual descriptions, if well done, can give readers an image that is compelling, the addition of digital graphics, video and audio create a portrait that is deeper and richer than the text alone (Figure 2).
Glaser and Strauss's defense of the quality of qualitative research in sociology stood as a valiant rebuttal to quantitative sociologists.
In social sciences, there is a shift from the digitality of qualitative research to collaborative data coding, analysis, and thinking (Uehara et al.
The market can be seen as a complex system, or a family.
Voice recognition has the potential to make keyboards obsolete and open up data gathering possibilities even further.
Researchers doing computer-assisted research involving sensitive information outside North America should take the time to understand the legal context in which computing operates, and especially the extent to which the nation state in which their participants
Whereas substantive theory is context bound, formal theory is more abstract and may be applicable to many settings or other experiences." (MORSE, 1994, p.34) [33]
Considering this triple understanding and interpretation, a ‘Four-phased Contextual Understanding, Interpretation and Reporting Framework' has been developed for the reporting process.
The core variable reoccurs frequently in the data and comes to be seen as a stable pattern that is more and more related to other variables.
The researcher builds a complex, holistic picture, analyses words, reports details of informants, and conducts the study in a natural setting'.
To enhance the possibility of interoperability, we used constructs established by RDFS, the OWL and Simple Knowledge Organization System (SKOS),4 in combination with the RDF data model to define constraints that data must meet (Holland & Culture, 2010; Nath et al., 2017, 2020).
With the increased computing power of computers over the last few years, together with the growing amount of cultural data now available in digital form, computer software can analyse an unlimited number of textual and visual data contained in corpora.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)
Whereas some proposals have identified a shortlist of IT/IS artefacts and others have refrained from any characterization, our proposal is to identify a few core IT/IS artefacts and a generative mechanism by which secondary artefacts can be derived.
That we must be cautious to equate system and artefact is supported, be it in other wordings, by management researchers.
Again, in this step, it is important to select one to two people from different participant segments to confirm the relevance of the outputs and how well they match with the participants' own experiences.
"Adequacy of data" and a "generalized story" smack of worrisome accuracy and © 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
Knowledge in such research is not solely derived from testing theories based on relevant empirical data.
Both in Simon [30] and in more recent publications [22] the words artefact and system are sometimes used as synonyms.
45) that what theoretical sampling is and what is its role in grounded theory approach.
We also have concerns about confidentiality issues when sensitive information is being transmitted via text, and would feel more comfortable conducting the interview via Skype (using audio only or with video).
Time must be spent de-identifying data (e.g., redacting information from transcripts, deidentifying people in photos/videos, anonymizing digital media), which may also require advanced technological skills and software.
As a result of the extraction process we generated a database containing over 230 million RDF triples from the EXIOBASE and the YSTAFDB database.
To better understand how these technological changes affect our social and private life, education, science, government, democracy, or business, we must also understand how their scale and dynamics affect the contemporary research methodology of social sciences, including qualitative methods.
Retrieved from http://pre.ethics.gc.ca/eng/archives/policypolitique/reports-rapports/reports-rapports/ Tapscott, D.
The first misconception involves the widespread belief that scientific method has a natural beginning, whether it be with observations, theories, or problems.
In principle, we prefer make plan and use plan of an artefact to be characterized as artefact parts - so that they are not evaluated in isolation.
This in itself creates savings and efficiencies by minimizing transcription time and the errors that would otherwise inevitably accompany that process.
While they were standing, not knowing what to do, our expert was reading information about their previous arrival on the computer.
Our specialist was already seeing patients in the room at the far end, which was bigger than the others.
The open-ended character of Strauss's earlier work is more clearly represented in constructivist grounded theory than in Strauss and Corbin's books in the 1990 and 1998.
Because the focus of qualitative research is idiographic and naturalistic and attends to individuals' subjective experiences and to context(s), the data collected in qualitative studies can be highly personal and sensitive, and it can be difficult to deidentify participants and settings within a dataset.
The model instantiates "the system-dynamics" artefact.
To publish interoperable content in the Semantic Web requires that information providers agree upon common frameworks and common controlled vocabularies or ontologies for annotation.
Providing full transcriptions of interview and observation notes, images of the research setting, scanned documents related to the study, and audio and video vignettes open up a portraiture-type study for alternative explanations.
The defining purpose of this method is to construct a theory that offers an abstract understanding of one or more core concerns in the studied world.
Glaser and Strauss are aiming for what they call theoretical saturation of the emerging conceptual categories.
An ICE is defined as an entity that is ‘generically dependent on some material entity and which stands in a relation of aboutness to some [other] entity'.
Adding provenance increases the transparency and trustworthiness of a dataset.
It can use any data, but obviously the favorite data, to date, is qualitative data.
The determination of the explanatory coherence of a theory is made in terms of three criteria: consilience (or explanatory breadth) simplicity, and analogy.
Grounded theory is regarded by Glaser and Strauss as a general theory of scientific method concerned with the generation, elaboration, and validation of social science theory.
Making Sense on the Information Super Highway Karen Swan, Joseph Bowman, Juan Vargas, Sylvia Schweig, and Aliyah Holmes
This new era, empowered by these transformative technologies, has transcended the traditional confines of time and space, forging pathways for enhanced collaborative endeavours in research.
(7) Do the theore tical findings seem significant, and to what extent?
Sixteen of these people ended up participating in more intensive follow-up interviews, accounting for 64% of interview participants.
Provides the IRI and label for each FlowObject in given dataset.
Perspectives in Clinical Research | July-September 2013 | Vol 4 | Issue 3
One misunderstanding embodied in problems talk presupposes that problems and methods are separate parts of inquiry.
(eds.), Creations of the Mind: Theories of Artifacts and Their Representation, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
It is essential that the analyst interrupts coding to memo ideas as they occur if he/she is to reap the subtle reward of the constant input from reading the data carefully, asking the above questions and coding accordingly.
disadvantages fall into three main categories: (a) start-up issues, (b) ethical issues, and (c) academic and institutional support.
The specification of these artefacts can include models and formal languages/constructs.
In the example, for instance level interoperability, SKOS predicates skos:narrower and skos:broader were used to correspond the instances between EXIOBASE and YSTAFDB.
The initial expectation for researchers might have been a primary focus on their study area, but the rapid pace of technological advancements has set a new paradigm.
 Data stewardship decisions are unclear: Most repositories are researcher-controlled, which provides flexibility in what to upload, how to store it, and control over access to research data and resources;
(2014) delivered a comprehensive overview, showcasing how digital tools can be leveraged at various junctures of the research journey.
M E T H O D S , TO O L S , D ATA , A N D S O F T WA R E
Perhaps ironically, early grounded theory researchers and proponents (e.g., Glaser 1978; Strauss and Corbin 1990, 1998) often treated the method as a mechanistic application of procedures to gather and analyze data.
Editor Managing Review: Niko Heeren Funding information The Open Data for Sustainability Assessment project initiated by Aalborg University primarily funded this research work; Matteo Lissandrini has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement, Grant/Award Number: 838216; Emil Riis Hansen was partially funded by the Poul Due Jensen Foundation and by the Obel Family Foundation
The first is a detailed explanation of the context (institutional, social, regional, and national) of the experience addressed in the qualitative study.
For example, the amount of CO2 emitted from a transport activity may be expressed in proportion to the quantity of another flow of this activity (e.g., 1 km of distance covered) or to a time period (e.g., CO2 emissions per year from transport).
In addition, Glaser defends small samples, presumes that grounded theory can be used with any epistemology (a philosophical theory of the nature of knowledge and reasoned justifications for it) and pursues parsimonious theoretical generalizations that transcend time, place, individuals, and circumstances.
2015).3 Furthermore, it is not unusual for psychol ogists to hold multi-disciplinary expertise, although they may not be employed in psychology programs.4 As in the 1960s, neither qualitative research, in general, nor grounded theory, in particular, fit judgments of quality based on quantitative research.
Reflectivity Contextual reflective practice is a practice in which the parties look at their experiences and the context in which the experience takes place from a certain critical distance and reflect on these.
Around 2007, internet-related research underwent a significant transformation, often called the "computational turn" or data study (Berry 2011).
SELECT ?FlowObject (xsd:string(?value) as ?value) ?unit FROM <Specify IRI of dataset, See query 1>
Practically speaking, amplifying awareness about these tools' multifaceted capabilities and dependability is urgently needed.
The development of hypertext, portable document files (pdf), digital media Journal of the Research Center for Educational Technology (RCET) Vol.
Increasingly, grounded theorists assume that the method is a way of thinking about, constructing, and interacting with data throughout the research process (Morse et al., forthcoming).
For example, exploratory factor analysis, long used in educational and psychological research, is really a stylized way of abductively generating common causes to explain significant patterns in correlational data.
In this way, the qualitative research process is presented as alive with its context.
This study was developed within the Big Open Network for Sustainability Assessment Information (BONSAI).
This transition represents a shift in research methods due to technological advancements.
The first framework based on contextual reading and analysis of qualitative data, the ‘Three-phased Contextual (Multiple) Reading and Analysis Framework', consists of two different types of analysis.
This yielded a highly error-filled copy that required almost as much time to edit as traditional transcription would have taken.
The rise of Big Data means that researchers are now confronted with far larger qualitative data sets than before.
The Golden Middle: Aligning Technology, Professional Development, and Learning Allison Goedde, Cynthia D.
The bigger issue is likely whether the interested reader has the expertise, or has access to the expertise, to actually run all these programs and servers and equipment.
Re-contextualization and re-framing: The effort to understand and interpret in different contexts is completed at the third step with re-contextualization and re-framing (abstraction).
GT is concerned with generating a multivariate conceptual theory- not data variation for QDA.
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
As mentioned earlier, Glaser and Strauss clearly recognize the importance of understanding method in the context of problem-solving.
In the ‘Interpretation and suggestions' section, the narration of a sample experience (re-experiencing) through the re-contextualization and re-framing that emerged as a result of the interpretation.
As it is the systematic development of theory in social settings and it depends upon inductive approaches which is appropriate for the study mainly aim on theory development (Glaser & Strauss, 1967).
Resonance demonstrates that the researchers have constructed concepts that not only represent their research participants' experience, but also provide insight to others.
Website: www.picronline.org DOI: 10.4103/2229-3485.115387
On the one hand, it can be used as an analysis model of a non-technical system, for instance, a household.
In terms of the ontology of artefacts, these systems are non-technical artefacts, if there is a design specification, with a make plan and use plan, and these plans may take the form of a "design model" or "use model".
This I care about." (e-mail correspondence, Jan 2002) [22]
During the first stage of this process, a filter is applied to remove all ambient noise from the recording that may have been present during the initial interview.
(b) A narrative study on professional identity formation.
?act bont:hasActivityType / rdfs:label ?activityType .
(2012) were the first to attempt the possibility of adding semantic information to life cycle inventory.
However, this does not invalidate the DSR ambition.
These contexts and reflections are also taken into account when writing the discussion and interpretation sections.
Not every software program is a IS design artefact.
Comprehension is reached when the researcher has interviewed enough to gain indepth understanding." (MORSE, 1994, p.39) [25]
Within the scope of this model developed through the narrativity, contextuality, and reflectivity approach, this article has tried to concretize these approaches, which have been on the agenda recently, in the context of qualitative data analysis, interpretation, and reporting and to create a framework in this direction.
Contrasting the generated theory with extant other theories to prove, improve or disprove one or the other neglects or ignores constantly comparing the theories for category and © 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
AEI method structures the methodological space within which our research problems operate.
This paradigm champions CAQDAS for adept data management and coding.
The focus and flow is immediately into conceptualization using the constant comparative method.
a palette of interviews, observations, documents, photographs, etc.) and blending these elements into a product that captures the essence of the environment under investigation are difficult tasks.
In addition, with qualitative methods, the relationship between the researcher and the participant is often less formal than in quantitative research.
Whereas the literature often isolates either the designer intention or the artefact use, our ontology keeps the two in balance.
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
The circles refer to the classes (and subclasses) defined in the BONSAI ontology.
however, researcher-controlled access to data and materials does not address long-term storage and stewardship issues (e.g., after a researcher retires; moves from one institution to another).
Do not give the respondent any idea of your personal views on the topic of the question or survey.
First, the boundaries between "virtual" and "real" communities began to overlap as networks of individuals who were already part of "real world" friendship cliques or networks began to bond and interact with people of shared interests they met through their participation in these newly forming virtual communities.
As a reconstruction, it should not be understood as an accurate report of Glaser and Strauss's account of grounded theory.
These observations combine three elements: (a) digital technologies and their possibilities ensure doing new things that the qualitative research community has never undertaken before and doing better things than it has always performed; b) the social dynamics triggered, supported, and fuelled by the development of digital technologies and the implications they have for sampling and social research; and (c) the possible implications of these social and technological changes for the development of the field of qualitative research (Palys and Atchison 2012).
‘Sampling is a major problem for any type of research.
We introduced interoperability at both ontological level and individual data level (see Figure 2).
Ethical Issues Because we have not addressed the various new venues for research that have been made possible by the Internet, we will not discuss the many ethical issues that arise, and have already been discussed, such as where the dividing line is between "public" and "private" on the Internet and what "netiquette" is involved when approaching and interacting with various social networking groups (but see Atchison, 1999; Palys & Atchison, 2008).
Qualitative research is used to explore the potential antecedents and factors about which little has been known and explored (Strauss & Corbin, 1998).
(12) Always treat your codes, categories and theoretical outlines as provi sional and open for revision and even rejection in the light of new data and further analysis.
The agreed themes are grouped among themselves to form the main contexts and dimensions.
There are numerous datasets available for sustainability assessments, however the access to a large share of established datasets is proprietary.
They force him/her to focus on patterns among incidents that yield codes and to rise conceptually above detailed description of incidents.
• Keep the difference between technical objects and non-technical objects.
In this regard, we have found the sorts of networks created by social networking sites can be extremely useful in acquiring samples, even among, and sometimes particularly among, marginalized, stigmatized, or otherwise socially isolated persons who have sought to connect with others in virtual space.
Our understanding of the social world emerges from these tools and data sources.
Understanding and leveraging new digital technologies, alongside enhancing digital capabilities, are crucial for researchers in this domain.
The possibilities of multiple comparisons are infinite and so groups must be chosen according to theoretical criteria.
It is distributed free of charge over the World Wide Web under the Creative Commons License (Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 3.0 United States) to promote dialogue, research, and grounded practice.
There is a risk that the artefact concept loses its meaning if it includes any decision or any solution.
We introduced a class DeterminingFlow to identify the specific flows of an activity for which a change in demand or supply will affect the activity level.
(3) Take an open, non-committal, critical, analytic view of the existing literature in the field.
Later on memos generate new memos, reading literature generates memos, sorting and writing also generate memos-memoing is never done!
Theoretical codes give integrative scope, broad pictures and a © 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
There are various methods of formulating a research design for the study.
At the moment, there are multiple databases and infrastructure that are available to researchers, but the landscape of the digital research infrastructure is complex and difficult to navigate.
Another common trap is to carry out a superficial reading and analysis and conduct theming as a way of collecting content and giving it descriptive titles.
We have made a key distinction between software program and IS application.
In general, there is a lack of a common platform to exchange data within industrial ecology (Pauliuk et al., 2016, 2019).
This intermediate CSV format formalizes a list of instances of Flows, FlowObjects, ActivityTypes, and Locations in a given dataset.
An Appraisal of the Design Science Analogy for Management.
I suggest that Glaser and Strauss's general plea for checking the data should be taken by grounded theorists as a reminder that they should seek to reliably establish phenomena in multiply-determined ways before they begin to generate grounded theory.
Semantic Web and Linked Open Data (LOD) are promising solutions that can be exploited to develop scalable solutions for data sharing (Fathalla et al., 2020).
This class includes the labels of entities that are produced or consumed by an activity or added to or removed from a stock accumulation.
These challenges make the possibility of reproducibility and reusability of projects impossible or extremely labor intensive (Ingwersen, 2015; Ingwersen et al., 2015), leading to the slowdown of scientific progress in interdisciplinary fields (Pauliuk et al., 2016).
THEORY DEVELOPMENT Because they are caught in the grip of hypothetico-deductive orthodoxy, educational and social science researchers are ever concerned to test theories with respect to their empirical adequacy.
In our view, this analysis is useful when we are talking about language and mental states.
(2016) introduced the concept of collaborative interpretation, which involves researchers working together to interpret and analyse data, leveraging the power of online collaboration tools.
Considering the inundation, overwhelming and overload of QDA dictums, "words" and assumed requirements on GT methodology, the reader will see that it is hard to both assimilate and withstand this avalanche on GT methodology.
Then, by returning to the text, the data can be subjected to multi-layered reading and analysis in the focus of each determined context separately.
Otherwise, the focus of the research will be lost through over-coding and this may result in the researchers getting lost in the text and codes.
This broader framework combines environmental LCA with economic life cycle costing (LCC) and social LCA (sLCA) and is referred to as life cycle sustainability assessment (LCSA).
15309290, 2022, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jiec.13220 by Cochrane Uruguay, Wiley Online Library on [18/06/2025].
He/she must have the ability to conceptualize and organize, make abstract connections, visualize and think multivariately.
The venue of DVD has the potential of taking portraiture to a new level.
The scope for qualitative methods in research and clinical trials in dementia.
This can, at least in part, be explained by the multiplicity of qualitative research traditions (e.g., discourse analysis, ethnography, phenomenological research, conversation analysis) and diversities within them (e.g., critical discourse analysis, inter pretative phenomenological analysis, critical ethnography, constructivist grounded theory), rooted in various ontological and epistemological beliefs and research ideals.
A critical appraisal of Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot's Portraiture as a method of educational research.
Provides the label of the ActivityType, its location, value/amount of FlowObject (carbon dioxide, fossil) and unit
This paper proceeds on the assumption that grounded theory can be strengthened by reconstructing it in accordance with recent developments in scientific realist methodology.2 I shall call this general account of scientific method "abductive explanatory inferentialism" (AEI).
SELECT * FROM <Specify IRI of dataset, See query 1> WHERE { ?FlowObject a bont:FlowObject .
They never dreamt that their method would cross many disciplinary and professional borders such as in psychology, nursing, medicine, education, computer science, and urban planning.
https://ontology.bonsai.uno/core/ontology_v0.2.ttl
They are expected to wear multiple hats, transitioning seamlessly from a core researcher to a pseudo-technologist.
Qualitative research in psychology, Grounded theory-based research within exercise psychology: A critical review.
Keywords: grounded theory, inductive reasoning, theory building, theoretical sampling, ethics 1.
This review gives you the opportunity to show how your analysis fits, extends, or challenges leading ideas in your field.
When the program is executed according to the use plan, a new database state is created.
While the patient is inside, our specialist is only interested in him/her.
Because this process used our own voices, which had already been trained in the program, the error rate was trivial and easily edited with only a few interviews for practice.
Their inductive perspective has stemmed in part from their dissatisfaction with the prevalent hypothetico-deductive practice of testing "great man" sociological theories.
Hence, Flow is a subclass of the class Measure as defined by OM ontology.
The predicates (using prefix "prov:") used to define provenance from the metadata are provided by the Prov-O ontology Note: https://www.ontology-of-units-of-measure.org/ https://www.w3.org/ns/prov#
The two complement each other, enhancing the overall quality of research.
The W3C standard provides additional information on the use and structure of schemas used to represent data in RDF format (Brickley & Guha, 2014).
Boon, M., Knuuttila, T.: Models as epistemic tools in engineering sciences.
Construting Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide through Qualitative Analysis.
Health consequences of workplace bullying: Experiences from the perspective of employees in the public service sector.
of a computer program, PI (processes of induction), which contains explicit algorithms for abductively generating potential explanations of puzzling phenomena.
One of the following two methods is used in this reading: (1) single-layered contextual reading and analysis, and (2) multi-layered reading and analysis through two to three main contexts identified.
Alternatively, some qualitative researchers maintain that data re-use and secondary analysis may be possible, with sufficient consideration of the original purposes, context, and conditions under which the data were originally produced (Kuula, 2011).
To delimit the scope of artefacts to those products that have "a practical purpose", we require the use plan to refer to a use practice (this can be an end user practice but also a production system like a plant).
Sometimes the IT is called a socio-technical system.
From such a point of view, this paper first briefly outlines the design process of qualitative studies and then proposes a model for the analysis, interpretation, and reporting of qualitative data.
QDA Blocking of GT This paper has a simple message.
We advocate line-by-line coding as a first step, because it forces the researcher to take a fresh look at the data, compare fragments of these data, and ask analytic questions about them.
The first concerns the security of digital data that is gathered interactively via the Internet, for example, through web surveys or interviews that in one way or another are computer-assisted (e.g., by using Skype or any of the various messaging or networking programs).
The yellow rectangles refer to instances of ActivityTypes and FlowObjects from YSTAFDB.
Cleland J, Durning SJ (Eds) (2015) Researching medical education.
3.15 Sorting and writing up Throughout the constant comparative coding process, the researcher has been capturing the emergent ideation of substantive and theoretical categories in the form of memos.
Comprehensive criteria to judge validity and reliability of qualitative research within the realism paradigm.
When images, and audio and video clips were shared with the teachers participating in the cited studies, or colleagues interested in the research, they were very positive in their responses.
Efficient project management is another crucial skill, especially when dealing with digital resources, virtual teams, and online tasks.
The wording of the advertisements was phrased in such a way so as to highlight the importance of the research "giving voice" to this group of stigmatized individuals whose views had rarely, if ever, been sought.
Single-layered reading and analysis: The text is returned to and read again through the emerging framework (with its contextual dimensions) and the revised research problem.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 5(2), 1-11.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press
However, the usefulness of this concept may not fit the stance of desperate people who experience constant crises.
The relative ease with which these forums could be set up, maintained, and used by anyone with storage space provided by their Internet Service Provider (ISP), combined with the emergence of meta-search engines such as Alta Vista, allowed growing numbers of people with access to the Web to migrate to and settle in virtual communities that were even more reflective of their particular social, political, economic, or geographic background, interests, and beliefs.
Melding the methodologies and tools from fields like Digital Humanities, Corpus Linguistics, Big Data Analysis, and Computer Science has redefined the contours of qualitative data analysis.
An individual object is said to conform to the artefact if it its composition is according to the make plan, it shows the specified capacities, and its use intention corresponds to the use plan (for convenience, we also talk about artefact instances for these conforming individuals).
Men who buy sex: Preliminary findings of an exploratory study.
What has been said so far is illustrated with an example in Figure 1a and 1b.
These changes, in turn, lead us to a discussion on the validating standards of practising digital qualitative research, emphasizing the need for rigour and integrity in the digital era (Brown 2002; Dicks 2012; McCrohon 2013).
We further developed new classes to fill gaps identified in the knowledge model of existing LCA ontologies and to align the terminology with the Semantic Web.
In the remainder of this article, I will try to show how GT stands alone on its own, as a conceptualizing methodology.
In this regard, the important definition of the theoretical sampling presented by Glaser and Strauss (1967, p.
Result Provides the IRI and label for each activityType in given dataset EXIOBASE : 164 YSTAFDB: 2190
European Journal of Social Sciences, 15(4), 490-500.
Digital methods provide various research strategies for dealing with online data's temporal and unstable nature.
[23] The GT problem and core variable must emerge and it will.
Complex social systems are process-focused and context-dependent systems, where process and context are intertwined.
Although it is clear that Glaser and Strauss are not naive inductivists, the actual nature of the inductive relation that, for them, grounds emergent theories in their data is difficult to fathom.
For Glaser and Strauss, grounded theory is said to emerge inductively from its data source in accordance with the method of "constant comparison." As a method of discovery, the constant comparative method is an amalgam of systematic coding, data analysis and theoretical sampling procedures which enables the researcher to make interpretive sense of much of the diverse patterning in the data by developing theoretical ideas at a higher level of abstraction than the initial data descriptions.
The couple in their mid-20s entered the room with hesitant steps, holding hands.
This represents a profound shift in how we approach research questions.
An artefact network is a network of imbricating artefacts.
Data Conversion Qualitative researchers need to develop a comfort level with hypertext and digital image, audio and video technologies to successfully integrate digital data into their work.
When combined with quantitative measures, qualitative study can give a better understanding of health related issues.
For example, Kathryn MAY unwittingly erodes the GT methodology in QDA fashion when describing the cognitive processes inherent in data analysis.
Retailers clearly felt more comfortable showing off and explaining "their" store, while the interviewer enjoyed having both concrete referents to anchor what was being spoken about and the ability to point to and ask about product, store features, and other issues that came to the interviewer's or retailer's attention.
GT fractures the story in the service of conceptualization.
The intended use of the model for scientific understanding resonates with the design science perspective, although the distinction between practical and scientific can be diffuse.
Lawson, C.: An Ontology of Technology: Artefacts, Relations and Functions.
However, it is more realistic to hold that research begins wherever it is appropriate to enter its reasoning complex.
Incorporating digital data into qualitative designs of portraiture can produce a richer, and more complex, representation.
Ontologies are the building blocks for describing the meaning of data in the Semantic Web (Ragget, 2009).
These software solutions offer nuanced coding mechanisms, facilitating a deeper understanding of the themes, patterns, and narratives present in the data.
Its history and evolution and the two schools of thoughts e.g.
Glaser and Strauss (1967) tied quality to making new theoretical contributions.
The local bridge club or Little League Baseball organization could share information not only among its local members, but also could network with similar groups elsewhere.
The text, then, could be analyzed, coded and compared with classmates.
The BONSAI community resolved to build on prior ontologies used to define primary concepts in environmental sustainability assessment, particularly with respect to LCA.
They are particularly useful to define "knowledge" that cannot easily be represented as mathematical or statistical relationships (e.g., categorical data) (Stevens & Lord, 2009).
It is a process of piecing together data, of making the invisible obvious, of recognizing the significant from the insignificant, of linking seemingly unrelated facts logically, of fitting categories one with another, and of attributing consequences to antecedents.
This latter activity Glaser and Strauss claim is an integral part of the research process.
[67] To preconceive a theoretical outline is to risk logical elaboration.
The ubiquity of the portable document format (PDF) journal articles, the growth of online publications, and the dissolution of linguistic, cultural, and geographic borders that previously placed limitations on access to globally produced knowledge have made the management of information during the literature review, proposal writing, and research design process increasingly challenging.
With the help of NLP tools, this method can easily manage data from many different sources, making more data available for qualitative research.
Given the pragmatist influence on grounded theory methodology, it is not surprising to find Strauss characterizing scientific method in Peircean fashion as comprising induction, deduction, and verification.
This multi-method cherry picking approach, while obviously acceptable to QDA, is not compatible with the requirements of GT methodology.
These methodologists subscribe to acknowledging multiple realities, seeking diverse perspectives, and engaging in critical analysis throughout the research process.
Ethnographers of the 1960s commonly discovered their consider able quantities of data lacked depth and richness.
Linking of a dataset to Semantic Web requires the development of a semantically linked core ontology in addition to the use
Data ownership and sovereignty are also important considerations for researchers who generate and/or steward Indigenous knowledge and data.
The planning stages of a project are often the time when information management is most important.
?act bont:hasActivityType / rdfs:label "Cultivation of wheat".
Table 3 gives examples of some competency questions and their corresponding queries.
The archiving feature of a discussion forum allows for continuity in a discussion that might evolve over months or even years; such a process is not easily replicated in static print situations.
Conclusions and recommendations are written through reframing.
Theorizing in GT is an emergent process generated by continuous cycling of the integrated processes of collecting, coding and conceptual analysis with the results written up constantly in memos.
Once the researcher has achieved theoretical saturation of the categories, he/she proceeds to review, sort and integrate the numerous memos related to the core category, its properties and related categories.
Moreover, it teaches collaborative thinking and teamwork and fosters the development of new analytical, digital, and Information Technology (IT) skills.
See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
How confidentiality risk aversion is killing research on sensitive topics.
Data are recordings or reports that are perceptually accessible.
(Continued ) Narrative 1: Hesitant, scared comings, embarrassed, angry leavings
Of 511 responses, 168 students reported having been bullied in the past and 36 volunteered to be interviewed.
These tables first appeared in Thornberg and Charmaz (2014).
Guidelines for quality in autobiographical forms of self-study research.
While not all of these members are active, and some individuals are members of multiple boards (as was the case with the principal researcher for the purpose of this study), even if every individual member was a member of all seven forums, there would still be over 31,000 unique members.
2 Stockholm University, Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, Sweden
For example, we introduced a class BalanceableProperty to identify quantitative flow data which follows law of conservation.
Recognizing one's limitations and seeking partnerships becomes crucial.
Associative relationships and causative relationships between variables are tried to be revealed.
This evolution suggests that the traditional notion of a "one-size-fits-all" approach to science is under revision.
YSTAFDB includes extensive information on the source of the data for each flow.
Another important point is the encounter between experience (concrete) and existing theories (abstract) and the transformation of both theory and experience together as a result of these encounters.
The association for the study of medical education.
Although explaining the dynamics of this colonization process is beyond the scope of our article, recognizing that it is happening is a prerequisite to understanding some of the methodological implications that flow from it.
Examples of Digital Data in Portraiture The following paragraphs synthesize the work of one qualitative researcher over a four-year period; the analysis is the result of a self-study process (Bullough & Pinnegar, 2001).
Digital research infrastructure that supports the needs of qualitative researchers should: 3.1.
However, in this case, the narrative/story is written with a different purpose.
(11) Ask questions about your categories: What are their properties?
This expands the need for disk space in order to include additional information.
FROM <Specify IRI of dataset, See query 1> WHERE { ?f a bont:Flow; bont:hasObjectType ?fobject .
For example, in ethnographic research with a narrative design in which the narratives of the surgical team about their experiences in clinical education and healthcare processes are studied, the qualitative data collected can be subjected to triple reading and analysis through three different contexts, namely (1) social, emotional, relational context, (2) system, and (3) dominant discourse, language, and patterns of relating to power in institutional and social culture.
An entity (person or thing) that performs an activity.
Qualitative research is the best method for exploring research (Creswell, 2007).
Monitoring of the sites' discussion boards over time revealed these virtual communities form around specific subcultural communities of buyers and sellers that are defined by their status (as a buyer or seller of sex), their venue experience or preference (e.g., street, escort, independent, and parlour), and their geographic location (major Canadian cities).
Journal of Technology and Design Education, (21) 381-394 (2010).
However, there are two critical issues to be considered at this point.
However, the researcher who employs AEI method is dealing
The project began with distributing 523 open-ended questionnaires to students in three secondary schools and two universities in Sweden.
The Academy Perhaps most surprising for us in terms of obstacles to pursuing the digital vision we have outlined in our own research and with our students are the impediments that have arisen within the academy.
A new element in our ontology is to let the design specification inhere in a conversation between designers and users, a conversation that has several phases, in fact, an ongoing conversation as long as the artefact persists.
Specifies the Activity that a Flow is an output of
A multi-stage model of word of mouth through electronic referrals.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(6), 615631.
Problems are generated, selected for consideration, developed, and modified.
This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (https:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by/ 4.0/).
However, Paul Thagard has recently developed a promising account of theory evaluation which takes inference to the best explanation to be centrally concerned with establishing explanatory coherence.15 Thagard's theory is not a general theory of coherence; rather it is a theory of explanatory coherence where propositions hold together because of their explanatory relations.
The Schema ontology was used to develop the Geonames geographical database that makes it possible to add geospatial semantic information (Wick & Vatant, 2012).
"jewelry and silverware" from silver "fabrication and That is, a flow can be defined as an input or output of an manufacturing" (ActivityType) in India in the year 1997.
Because of its focus on artificial objects, DSR has similarities with traditional engineering sciences and medicine.
I hope to give explanatory strength to those PhD dissertation level students to stand their GT grounds when struggling in the face of the misapplied QDA critique by their seniors and supervisors.
These communities are crucial in facilitating the development and application of digital tools in qualitative research.
These terminologies reflect the evolving nature of research collaboration and the increasing reliance on digital technologies to facilitate collaboration and knowledge sharing.
American sociologists Barney Glaser and Anselm Strauss's (1967) The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research not only proposed a new method of analysis, but also led the charge of defending the quality of qualitative research.
The woman was waiting almost hidden behind her partner, never lifting her face from the floor.
Actually hearing the emotion and inflection in a teacher or student's voice as they share their ideas, or seeing the students working in the computer lab helps to support the written descriptions in the research reports.
Collins (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1981), 124-63.
[23,16] describe artefacts as the outcome of design research, distinguishing four typical types: constructs, models, methods and instantiations.
In this paper, a new framework is proposed based on contextualization, reflectivity, and narrativity and presented in a guide format for the evaluation and use of those interested.
Portraiture in DVD More advanced digital technologies can be tapped to create a "high-tech" genre of interactive video portraiture.
The assault is so strong and well meaning that many- particularly novice researchers-do not know, nor realize, that GT is being remodeled by default.
All classes and predicates defined with the prefix "bont:" are terms specific to the BONSAI ontology.
GT does not search for description of particularistic accounts.
Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and techniques.Sage Publications, Inc.
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
What exactly do we say when we call something an IT artefact?
Thus, sorting forces ideational discrimination between categories while relating them, integrating them and preventing their proliferation.
Instrument is a role of an object in an event or activity.
Opportunities and Efficiencies in Research The Over-Arching Challenge: Information Management At this point it would be hard to deny that many aspects of the research process that were formerly accomplished through more conventional approaches are becoming increasingly difficult to manage.
In short, grounded theorists are building the kind of ‘trustworthiness,' of their research that counseling psychologists Morrow (2005) and Williams and Morrow (2009) rightly argue is imperative to achieve in research practice.
Neither he nor his wife wanted us in that intimate moment.
‘A theory is not the formulation of some discovered aspect of a pre-existing reality ‘out there'.
Glaser and Strauss opposed the separa tion of data gathering and analysis that characterized ethnographic research of their time.
As digitisation becomes integral to research, it reflects qualitative researchers' myriad techniques and perspectives, ensuring the data is responsibly collected, stored, and analysed.
[28] MORSE continues with her description of GT: "As synthesis is gained and the variation in the data becomes evident, grounded theorists sample according to the theoretical needs of the study.
Such an environment allows e-readers to analyze the data presented and the researcher's position within the research setting to better critique the quality of the final assertions.
This particular example consists of a 45-minute video that paints a picture of a fifth grade classroom's integration of computer technology (Figure 3).
See query 1> SELECT ?activityType ?location (xsd:string(?value) as ?value) ?unit FROM <Specify IRI of dataset, See query 1>
For example, while the Internet initially allowed 354
Glaser and Strauss realized that the iterative process of increasing the analytic power of the researcher's conceptual categories gave grounded theory much of its strength.
What is paradoxical about this transition is that data scientists now frequently explore questions that were once the exclusive domain of sociologists.
Open science in sport and exercise psychology: Review of current approaches and considerations for qualitative inquiry.
[35] These quotes clearly lump GT into the multi-method QDA camp with the result being default remodeling by erosion of classic GT methodology.
A separate hypertext document links to various elements of the DVD and within the DVD structure, users can navigate to additional documents (student activity sheets, rubrics, etc.).
The analyst now focuses on one category as the core variable and only variables related to the core variable © 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
Linking to this ontology enables integrating geographical data, such as names of places in various languages, geographical coordinates, and population from various sources (Wick, 2012).
Conclusion In this paper, the researcher has highlighted the qualitative research methods approach - grounded theory which is not a theory by itself but play an important role in developing and building a theory from data.
SPARQL query Check BONSAI SPARQL endpoint (http://odas.aau.dk) for complete list of queries and live results
The spirit of collaboration, rooted in mutual reliance, collective synergy, and shared objectives, drives more successful and impactful research outcomes.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 18, 1-6.
and Ram, S.: Design Science in Information Systems Research'.
In the grander scheme of things, hardware and software costs are not unreasonable, but neither are they inexpensive.
Researcher hits out at Boston College in IRA interviews row.
A different way of classifying IS artefacts is by means of their function.
However, even the process of this translation extended the impact of the writing.
Using constructivist grounded theory, Snow and Moss (2014) delineate the conditions, including those shaping behavior and emotions, in which seemingly spontaneous collective action arises.
Examples of such venues include picture-uploading sites, such as Picassa, as well as blogs, Facebook, G-mail, and so on.
What are the output flows from an Activity in a given location?
Theories, then, are generated abductively and developed through analogical extension.
Grounded theory builds checks into the research process that contribute to its quality, such as engaging in focused coding.
After reading the text, the analysers can ‘take a step back' and ask themselves the following question: ‘What is this text/narrative mainly talking about, what does it mean?' Other questions they can then ask themselves are: ‘Do we need more data to understand exactly what the experience (situation, phenomenon) is?
A classic example of this is NVivo, a well-known software program that is generally considered to be useful for the analysis of qualitative data.
Use of semantics provide reasoning opportunities and interpretive support.
At the minimum, it specifies the critical components and their relationships (the artefact composition - system view).
The field of industrial ecology provides several tools for sustainability assessments.
Despite current perceptions and student's prayers, theory does not magically emerge from data.
Gergen pointed out that all empirical views are interpretive, an epistemological view most 21st century grounded theorists share.
If I didn't say or do things when other people were around, nothing embarrassing would happen, no one would tease me.
The participant was informed of these options and their respective advantages and disadvantages for him; however, in the end he would not have consented to the interview at all if the CAOI was not an option.
Be capable of storing and cross-linking multiple file types Given that qualitative researchers often combine multiple sources of data and types of data to inform their interpretations and analysis, it is also important that the digital research infrastructure be capable of storing and maintaining the datasets as a ‘whole.' 3.3.
New categories emerge and new incidents fit into existing categories.
The constant comparative method weaves the new data into the subconceptualization.
Many elements of the system, not only the IT but also e.g.
This involved wearing headphones, slowing the tape down by 20-30% (using another program such as the freely available Express Scribe, the commercially available Adobe Soundbooth, or the playback provisions in NVivo), and then speaking out what we heard into DNS as the recording played.
BONSAI is community-based organization dedicated to create a platform where all data, software, and algorithms to conduct sustainability assessments are maintained as open source (De Rosa & Weidema, 2019).
The challenge is to avoid running away and suppressing sensitive research, while recognizing when a realistic threat exists and engaging a specific ethical and/or legal strategy to address it (e.g., Palys & Lowman, 2010).
Exemplary Technology Integrators in the Elementary School: The Impact in a Fifth Grade Classroom Savilla Banister
As we innovate, we must ensure the integrity and security of our data and methodologies.
Quality criteria in various versions of grounded theory
The association for the study of medical education.
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
That is data saturation, and it occurs with relatively few interviews but seldom contributes to the analytic power of the study.
the limitations of such an austere account of confirmation are now widely accepted in the philosophy of science.14 While Glaser and Strauss do not articulate a precise account of the nature and place of theory-testing in social science, they do make it clear that there is more to theory appraisal than testing for empirical adequacy.
Therefore, it is critical that qualitative studies are designed, implemented, and reported taking into account these paradigmlevel differences (different ontology, epistemology, and methodology).
lyzing processes within technical or non-technical systems; or Codd's relational database model grounded in set theory.
However, as Palys and Atchison (2012) emphasise, the rapid change to online qualitative research methodologies has been met with mixed responses from the research community.
Abstract The use of Semantic Web and linked data increases the possibility of data accessi-
Health Care for Women International 37 (12):1289-303.
McMillan W (2015) Theory in healthcare education research: the importance of worldview.
To make processes explicit, grounded theorists study actions as well as meanings and show how they are connected.
His speech, which started quite confidently, started to shake as he got to his complaints.
of reading and analysis on embodied predispositions, orientations, attitudes, and behaviours (habitus) and frequently used ‘metaphors' in such a habitus.
• Include in the artefact design some make plan that specifies the composition • Include in the artefact design one or more use plans that specify use conditions, intended effect and relate to a use practice.
The residues of an epistemology of positivism are also evident in both Glaser's and Strauss and Corbin's texts because they presuppose neutral observers who (1) assume an external world, which can be discovered by meticulous observa tion, (2) separate themselves from the research process, (3) form an objective view of the data, and (4) treat their representation of research participants and the research process as unproblematic.
(2024) A model proposal for qualitative data analysis, interpretation, and reporting: contextuality, reflectivity, and narrativity.
what is the context of the experience/narrative) and how do the experiencing parties ‘relate to the context' (see Table 2.
This approach acknowledges the benefits of collective intelligence and the diverse perspectives that can be brought to the interpretation process.
The legacy of Anselm Strauss for constructivist grounded theory.
In Section 2, we recapitulate what has been written on the artefact concept in the (broad) DSR literature.
[56] Integrating a theory around a core variable delimits the theory and thereby the research project.
For those unfamiliar with the program, DNS, once installed, requires a brief training process in which the user reads standard passages for approximately 15 minutes.
[36]) a software application, as any design artefacts, exist in the historical reality in which technical aspects and social aspects (in a broad sense) are intertwined in many ways.
A Flow defines the transfer of an entity between different Activities performed by an Agent.
Atchison is the clear alpha technophile and the one who is typically the first to try out any new technology.
Retrieved from http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4060448 Rainie, S.
It integrates the relevant literature into the theory, sorting it with the memos.
Grounded Theory The qualitative research approach ‘grounded theory' has been developed by two sociologists, Barney Glaser & Anselm Strauss (Glaser, 1978, 1992; Glaser & Strauss, 1967, 2009; Strauss, 1987).
According to [35] ‘when a code is in the circumstance that somebody, with a kind of act of baptism, intends to produce certain effects on a computer, a new entity emerges ...
Finally, we provide our perspective on the challenges toward the adoption of Semantic Web technologies and technical solutions that can address these challenges.
Qualitative Research in the Digital Era: Obstacles and Opportunities Ted Palys, PhD Professor School of Criminology Simon Fraser University Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada Chris Atchison, MA Research Associate Department of Sociology University of Victoria Victoria, British Columbia, Canada © 2012 Palys and Atchison.
However, the form event governed by the make plan is an activity that is open to optimization and tool support, as any activity.
In a very real sense they function as the "range riders" of method by regulating our thinking in the contexts of theory generation, development, and appraisal.
However, it is crucial to underscore that sociologists and anthropologists, unlike many data scientists, possess a rich history and expertise in qualitative research.
101) cited in his book an interview with Jane Hood, understanding theoretical sampling.
Journal of Educational Computing Research, 22(4), 455-472.
With the exponential growth of quantitative datasets, extracting meaningful insights without integrating qualitative methodologies becomes a formidable challenge.
(2013) to merge focused codes such as ‘self-inhibition', ‘self-isolation', and ‘turning off emotions' into an even more comprehensive focused code devel oped into a category that they labeled ‘self-protecting', in which the former focused codes that constituted this category were included as subcategories representing different self-protecting strategies.
The effect of such default remodeling is a great loss of essential GT procedures blocked by the imposition of QDA worrisome accuracy requirements.
From the inception of the project, planning must be completed with an eye toward the final product.
The use plan of this IT application requires there to be a processor and a database/storage.
Bibliometric analysis of articles published from 1980 to 2009 in physical therapy, journal of the American Physical Therapy Association.
Another example arises in ethnographic research or focus group interviews where multiple members of a community or group know one another and where some individuals may wish to have their data stored for re-use, while others do not.
They are positioned alongside other recent approaches, such as cultural analytics, cultural studies, webometrics, and altmetrics, where distinctions are made between the data types (natively digital or digitised) and the algorithms (written or implemented).
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/342416461
A robust understanding of digital skills is essential to use these tools to their fullest potential.
We use the role instrument for the latter persisting participating objects only.
If you are interested in finding out more about this important research project visit us on the web at www.johnsvoice.ca In order to get the word out to potentially interested parties, Atchison posted a total of 450 advertisements using variations of the above wording over the duration of the project.
If a specific new class has the attributes of another class defined in an external ontology it can be linked using the predicate "rdfs:subClassOf" described by RDFS.
The choice of methodology should not be confused, lumped or used piecemeal if GT is involved.
In line with the pragmatist slogan "meaning is use", we consider the intended use (behavior) as the meaning of the text/sign.
Moreover, it must have instantiations so that evaluation knowledge can be acquired.
The physical input consists of the components of the artefact, whereas the intentional input corresponds to the make plan (as part of the artefact design).
When concrete experience and existing theories from the literature (abstraction) are placed at the two ends of the spectrum, the position in this triple understanding and interpretation will shift from right to left as we move from the first to the third (Figure 3).
The writing of theoretical memos is the core stage in the process of generating theory.
Issues of operating systems, file types, file management, hardware and software must be considered.
The first would have to be Research Ethics Boards (or REBs as they are known in Canada) and Institutional Review Boards (or IRBs as they are known in the United States), who rarely have a member with significant computing expertise, and, it seems, equally rarely have anyone with qualitative research expertise (Social Sciences and Humanities Research Ethics Working Committee, 2004).
Several auxiliary files are produced during the mapping as datasets are converted from excel or .csv to RDF strings.
intricacies of the digital age, the intersection of technology and social sciences-as strengthened by tools like CAQDAS-promises to enhance our understanding of societies.
[36] GT requires following its rigorous procedures to generate a theory that fits, works, is relevant and readily modifiable.
Once implemented it falls under legal rules, has an economic value, has an effect on social relationships etc.
Supporting all text objects and in particular the software specification dimensions are formal language artefacts, like programming languages.
Quantitative research had already been systematically codified and textbooks were increasingly available for learning how to do it.
This significantly increases the time and complexity of scientific research.
Under this heading, the context in which the qualitative study takes place (institutional, local, social, national, etc.) and the context of the research and the research team itself are clarified.
Weigand, H.: Value Expression in Design Science Research.
During this experience, there was a huge crowd in the corridor of the polyclinic and in front of the door.
Emergence vs forcing: Basics of grounded theory analysis.Sociology Press.
(1967) statement, little had been written, much less codified into a systematic statement, about how to construct a qualitative theoretical analysis of high quality.
what constitute the code and differentiate it from other codes.
Only as the researcher discovers codes and tries to saturate them by theoretical © 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
Because science pursues multiple goals, and because theories are typically underdetermined by the relevant empirical evidence, proper theory appraisal has to be undertaken on evaluative dimensions in addition to that of empirical adequacy.
Finally, plans to save and catalog the digital material collected must be confirmed and implemented.
These were further translated into SPARQL queries to extract the required information from the database (see Table 3 for examples).
Provide resource and training that are specific to qualitative inquiry Materials and training are currently targeted at primarily quantitative, postpositivist forms of inquiry; practical ‘how-to' resources are insufficient to address the complex ethical and epistemological issues facing qualitative researchers.
GT uses all types of interviews and, as the study proceeds, the best interview style emerges.
We begin by briefly explaining the logic of the method and then sketch the historical context of the development of grounded theory.
WHERE { ?dataset prov:hadMember <http://rdf.bonsai.uno/data/ystafdb/huse#F_25184>.
BalanceableProperty defines the flows that follow the law of conservation (e.g., Flows measured in wet/dry mass); BalanceablePropertyType defines the quantity of the measure (e.g., mass, energy, amount) defined in the BalanceableProperty and hence is a subclass of class Quantity as defined by OM ontology.
A second obstacle comes from university administrations that, at least in our experience, seem willing to devote significant portions of their budgets to quantitative software, but are unwilling to do the same for qualitative software.
Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung/Forum: Qualitative Social Research 9 (1):Art.
While this type of presentation is still text-based, the hypertext format allows for a more substantive inclusion of the data and options for interactivity.
It's not the matter of small or large but the representativeness (Neuman, 2011).
filter (contains(xsd:string(?dataset), "dataset")) .
[14] The word "analysis" is a catchall word for what to do with data.
We identified and explicitly linked to other common semantic ontologies and vocabularies in order to better support data integration, discovery, and alignment.
Since all her wife's tests were normal and suitable for conception, he had now consulted a urologist.
Design Science arose in the 1990's within the field of Information Systems and although its idea of artefacts included physical artefacts like hammers or medical drugs, its interest went mainly in the direction of symbolic artefacts such as encountered in the Information System domain.
As a result of the iterative process, coding and constant comparison, their constructed focused codes fit tightly with their data.
Description Transformation, distribution, storage processes
It prevented them from (1) gathering data in a superficial and random way; (2) feeling overwhelmed due to a huge amount of unanalyzed data; (3) being unfocused for lengthy periods; and (4) uncriti cally adopting the participants' view or stock disciplinary categories.
Building artefacts and evaluating artefacts in context is often seen as the core of DSR.
Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory (2nd ed.).
We talk about technical artefacts when the objects conforming to the artefact are technical objects, and non-technical artefacts when there are objects conforming to the artefact but not technical.
This holds in particular for design knowledge as pursued in Design Science Research.
The essential relationship between data and theory is a conceptual code.
[2] provocatively suggests avoiding the vague term IT artefact completely, especially when it is applied just to something containing IT, like an airplane, or related to IT, like user training.
A pebble at the beach is a natural object but when cleaned and moved by a human to serve as doorstep, it becomes a technical object.
Provides the total amount of wheat produced in Denmark, including environmental emissions linked directly to this activity
In this regard, this is pertinent to note that the researcher has got an informed consent statement signed by the participants, inform them of their rights and provide brief information about the research study (Neuman, 2011).
Indeed, Glaser and Strauss explicitly note that "the researcher does not approach reality as a tabula rasa -- [that he or she] must have a perspective [in order to] see relevant data and abstract significant categories from [it]."8 Hence, it is in the interest of obtaining emergent, diverse categories at different levels of abstraction that Glaser and Strauss would have the researcher hold all potentially relevant http://www.ed.uiuc.edu/EPS/PES-Yearbook/95_docs/haig.html (5 of 11)8/4/2006 9:04:24 AM
The ability to be honest about what exactly is the data is consequently distorted by the unattainable quest for QDA accuracy.
A fundamental transition occurred when state-of-the-art technology began integrating with conventional research methodologies, marking a transformative phase in the ever-evolving qualitative research methodology landscape.
While such sessions would not be particularly useful or feasible for single-interview studies, even when each interview lasts for more than an hour, they may be highly useful for something like an oral history project where a given participant is sometimes interviewed for dozens of hours.
But there is a difference between received concepts, problems and frameworks imposed on data by QDA methods and GT's focus on the generation and emergence of concepts, problems and theoretical codes.
If it exists in the organization then the researcher can conduct face-to-face, in-depth, open ended and semi-structured interviews and focus groups interviews.
Incidents are compared to incidents to establish underlying uniformity and its varying conditions.
Realistically, we presume and hope that some more adventurous and tech-savvy and/or financially independent readers of this document will start to experiment with the software and hardware they have, push their boundaries a bit further, and write follow-ups to this article that help create a bourgeoning inventory of tricks and tips that will bring computer-assisted qualitative research into the 21st century.
International Journal of Health Sciences 6 (2):64-76.
There are some other integral parts of the qualitative research methods while conducting grounded theory approach, have also been included and elaborated in this paper e.g.
Also, qualitative psychologists often work in specialized areas on multidisciplinary teams (e.g.
For example; carbon dioxide could be an instance of a class Emission and global warming could be an instance of a class Environmental Impact.
It provides a multimedia forum for the advancement of scholarly work on the effects of technology on teaching and learning.
Treat the literature as provisional and fallible, not as the Truth (for further reading, see Thornberg 2012; Thornberg and Dunne 2019).
This has further been elaborated by Guba and Lincoln (1983) that it is a naturalistic paradigm and assume that the reality is manifold and inter-related and it links the researcher with the subject.
Brewer (Eds.), Prostitution: On whores, hustlers, and johns (pp.
In addition, an interactive interface allowed readers to view the text, by chapters, with accompanying video and audio elements.
While the genre of portraiture has been defended convincingly as a credible form of educational research (Lawrence-Lightfoot & Davis, 2002) , weaknesses must be addressed in this type of practice (English, 2000).
[46] 3.5 Theoretical coding The conceptualization of data through coding is the foundation of GT development.
Paradigmatic controversies, contradictions, and emerging confluences, revisited.
Recommendations for increasing replicability in psychology.
Both datasets can be used for sustainability assessments individually or in combination.
Imagining contemporary qualitative research and data analysis in the humanities and social sciences is difficult.
Most datasets are shared in non-normative formats.
Research in the 1990s began to delve into the implications of digitality and digital interactivity.
From the constraint-composition perspective, a problem will be ill-structured to the extent that it lacks the constraints required for its solution.
This essay delves into the opportunities and challenges CAQDAS presents, examining its pivotal role in collaborative research.
The strong reflexivity under girding methodological self-consciousness (Charmaz 2017) means more than examining the researcher's methodological decisions.
Not all individual users participate in the conversation.
facts and theories in the background for some time.
270-272.) In later editions (Corbin and Strauss 2008, 2015), Corbin also added more general criteria of quality in qualitative research: methodological consistency, clarity of the purpose, self-awareness, training in how to conduct qualitative research, sensitivity to participants and data, willingness to work hard, ability to connect with the creative self, methodological awareness, and strong desire to do research.
During this phase the researcher is able to create a generalized story and to determine points of departure, of variation in this story.
We linked the BONSAI ontology to the W3C Prov-O ontology (Belhajjame et al., 2013; Hansen et al., 2020).Each of the classes are linked to other classes using one or more predicates.
Sharing these efforts with our colleagues, both to assist their research and to encourage them to begin incorporating some of the possibilities we have described into their research, is the easy and enjoyable part.
Creating subthemes and themes: Based on the reorganized codes, these are transformed into more inclusive, abstract expressions to create subthemes and themes related to the experience and the context in which it was lived (five to eight themes of two to four words each).
Journal of the Research Center for Educational Technology (RCET) Vol.
Some may want to find a colleague or assistant with these skills to deal with the practical concerns of this process.
What are the effects of these contextualized emotional experiences on the participants?
At the same time, some virtual communities that had been created on the basis of a more generic common interest grew to the point where the sheer size of the interest group made it both feasible and useful to organize on a more local basis.
Lincoln (Ed.), Strategies of qualitative inquiry (2nd ed., pp.
Their flexibility is one of the key reasons for their widespread adoption in the field of data management for the life sciences (Yeumo et al., 2017; Kamdar et al., 2019; Stevens & Lord, 2009).
The constant creativity of sorting memos prevents the use of computer sorting as used in QDA work.
On this formulation the constraints are actually constitutive of the problem itself; they characterize the problem and give it structure.
is the basis for justifying claims about phenomena, we will see later that judgments about explanatory coherence are the appropriate grounds for theory acceptance.
Unlike in the ontology developed by Janowicz et al.
In other cases, the two work on different aggregation levels: the IT research studying the effects of some component in the use context of the integrated IT system, and the IM research looking at the effects of the integrated system in the use context of an enterprise.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)
The CD-ROM described here was used by a professor teaching qualitative methods (Figure 1).
We appreciate that in an ideal world people who buy sex would be in a position to stand up and have their voices included in debates surrounding prostitution without fear of moral, social, legal or political persecution or prosecution; we recognize that in the world we currently live in this is rarely the case.
MORSE finishes: "As with the methods previously discussed, recontextualization is determined by the level of abstraction attained in the model development.
In many situations, such as a meteorological system, there is no design specification, but we can have a model for analysis and prediction purposes.
As such, creating a digital research infrastructure for the purposes of ‘auditing' qualitative analyses or to ‘verify' the validity of interpretations is incompatible with the epistemological positions of many qualitative researchers.
Moreover, the rapid advancements in the digital world necessitate professionals to be adaptable, ready to learn, and pivot as new tools and methodologies come to the fore.
Additionally, data visualisation tools make complex data more understandable, promoting a more explicit interpretation and communication of the results.
Participation in any kind of research must be voluntary, and the researcher must inform participants regarding all aspects of research studies.
2005; Rogers-Dillon 2005), insider-outsider (Louis and Bartunek 1992), and academic-practitioner (Hartley and Benington 2000).
The constant increase of volume and variety of data makes it more and more necessary to use higher performance computing infrastructure beyond personal computers.
Interview Data Eric: For example, by not putting my hand up during the lessons, being quiet and not standing out.
Research Paradigms in Qualitative Sports Research Management.In A.
Hearing the pauses, sighs, and chuckles embedded in an interview session can bring a greater sense of authenticity to the descriptions and conclusions of the researcher.
The other is to reorganize the existing framework based on the analysis outputs.
If I didn't say or do things when other people were around, nothing embarrassing would happen, no one would tease me.
These elements also can present a more public view of the researcher's role, addressing questions of positions of power and voice.
[64] Comparative reasoning in memos-by constant comparisons-undoes preconceived notions, hypotheses, and scholarly baggage while at the same time constantly expanding and breaking the boundaries of current analyses.
However, lacking these nuanced skills compels qualitative researchers towards more collaborative avenues.
Several attempts have been made to develop a formalized ontology particularly with respect to LCA.
Critical Criminology: An International Journal, 9(1-2), 163-170.
Section 3 is a short overview of our general artefact ontology.
As you proceed with your research, your memos become more definitive and analytic.
It is aimed to reveal intrinsic tendencies, affinities, attitudes, and behavioural patterns; and also, similarities and differences in understanding and making sense of phenomena.
Goldkuhl & Lind [11] make a distinction between artefacts as objects of empirical design practices and abstract design knowledge (see also more recently [9]).
Based on our ontological analysis, we can give some practical implications for the designer and design researcher in the form of a preliminary set of guidelines.
Summarizing, we have to distinguish different kinds of models.
The goal of GT is NOT the QDA quest for accurate description.
They give direction to these processes and specify their foci.
modelings of Grounded Theory (GT) and the subsequent eroding impact.
GROUNDED THEORY During the last 30 years sociologists Barney Glaser and Anselm Strauss have formulated and developed in great detail their grounded theory perspective on social science research.1 In their work they have consistently argued for the inductive discovery of theory grounded in systematically analyzed data.
The first is to prioritize the experience and stay in the experience, and thus, instead of making visible a difference that emerges through analysis, to prioritize the theory, to quickly match the themes with the existing explanations and conceptualizations of the theories, and thus to miss the nuances and uniqueness that can emerge through qualitative work.
With the digitisation of qualitative research and the development of new CAQDAS functionalities, greater emphasis is placed on the data validation procedure and ensuring the reliability of coding (Lu and Shulman 2008; Sweeney et al.
The equivalent amount of time spent in an in-person or telephone interview probably would have yielded a much more detailed and comprehensive account.
In our view, it makes sense to include somehow the system view to the Design Science artefact definition.
In GT, its relevance must emerge; it is not presumed.
Researchers can communicate with more people in less time in more difficult-to-reach regions.
Figure 1: Qualitative Research Methods CD-ROM Screenshots
The importance of data lies in the fact that they serve as evidence for the phenomena under investigation.
(2013) to construct a major category - what Glaser (1998) and Corbin and Strauss (2015) would refer to as the ‘core concept' of the study - namely ‘double victimizing'.
Example: Which economic activities emit "Carbon dioxide, fossil" and how much ?
In their development of grounded theory, Strauss and Corbin (1990; Corbin and Strauss 1990; Strauss and Corbin 1998) emphasized four general criteria: (1) quality of the data, in other words, grounded theorists need to carefully address and adopt quality criteria related to methods used for data gathering to secure credibility and trustworthiness of data; (2) the plausibility and value of the theory itself; (3) adequacy of the research process (sampling procedures, theoretical sampling, coding, categorization, development of hypotheses or conceptual relations between categories, and selection of core category through which the theory is developed); and (4) the issue of the empirical grounding of the theory.
Unlike in person or telephone interviews, with the CAOI it was quite difficult to establish a clear sense of trust and rapport, and it was extremely difficult to obtain the same naturalness of conversation that produced such rich and thoughtful commentary in the other interview settings.
Contextual text reading and analysis template Narrative 1: : : : First reading: Impressions, questions
The association for the study of medical education.
Then, concepts are compared to more incidents to generate new theoretical properties of the concept and more hypotheses.
These challenges and limitations are discussed above.
Further Neuman (2011) highlighted the units of analyses that it includes individuals, peoples, groups, organizations, movements, institutions, countries and so forth.
Queirós A, Faria D, Almeida F (2017) Strengths and limitations of qualitative and quantitative research methods.
434) and ‘Savoring: staying present and creating quality time' (p.
The material entity can be the paper, the other entity can be the person depicted in the digital image ICE.
In multi-layered reading and analysis, which is presented as a different reading method, there is multiple reading and analysis of the text by focusing on two to three different contexts.
Language and experience shape how researchers see the world.
Imposing the QDA approach on GT would block it from the start.
Central to this evolution is a need to grasp the profound shifts in understanding and studying society.
This requires honesty about taking all data as it comes, figuring it out and then its conceptualization.
Nevertheless, we do not recommend it in the research/interview context.
A grounded theory of the development of noble youth purpose.
Making or doing something within a spatial and temporal delimitation.
Srivastava P, Hopwood N (2009) A practical iterative framework for qualitative data analysis.
143) made the individual researcher responsible for research ethics.
That this grounded theory could have salience a half century later in a culture thousands of miles away is a testament to the genius behind what Glaser and Strauss did using Classical Grounded Theory.
Strauss and Corbin (1990) are clear that one collects and analyzes data before using theory in a grounded theory study.
Without digitisation and datafication, there would be no Big Data and the modern CAQDAS, combining interdisciplinarity and multiparadigmacity in qualitative data analysis and research.
This computer-aided analysis is a cornerstone of modern qualitative research, especially in content (textual) analysis and linguistic evaluations.
To get the full essence of the study, the researcher should get the participant's confidence, consent and approval before proceeding in an interview with the participant.
Being bullied because of being different; Eric: Because I was a different or a bit odd, I wasn't like them.
It has an attributed capacity (that the elements in the list are ordered) related to the use output.
Getting some kind of product with a few concepts rescues the QDA research, since the QDA description alone does not suffice.
It harmoniously merges quantitative and qualitative research methods, enhancing the depth of data visualisation.
Nevertheless, challenges arise due to researchers' insufficient knowledge and utilisation of these tools.
The Simon Fraser University research ethics board now prohibits researchers from gathering sensitive data through any United States company because of the threat to confidentiality the USA PATRIOT Act represents, and it is not the only research ethics board in Canada to have done so.
Strategies for this training can include modules and webinars similar to the TCPS-2 training required by all researchers at institutions in Canada, as well as training embedded in graduate student education.
The concepts of these theories can be utilized during the identification of themes.
∙ Property: A class which describes the relation between resources.
a medicine), and cease to exist, while others are not.
Both philosophical paradigms have their own strengths and weaknesses as described by Cavana, Delahaye, and Sekaran (2001) that positivism is considered superficial while, interpretivism is considered too subjective.
systems) contribute to the design knowledge accumulated in the artefact to which the individual conforms.
We also have begun incorporating what might be termed "adaptive" questioning where key words from responses earlier in the survey are incorporated into the wording of relevant subsequent questions, thereby enhancing user friendliness.
(2010) proposed the use of Semantic Web and LOD to collect, process, curate, and share data as a community rather than as individuals.
Memos reveal and relate by theoretically coding the properties of substantive codes-drawing and filling out analytic properties of the descriptive data.
Sociology and anthropology have had long histories of first-hand qualitative research from the beginning of their disciplines at the turn of the 20th century.
In "Theoretical Sensitivity" I wrote: "The goal of grounded theory is to generate a conceptual theory that accounts for a pattern of behavior which is relevant and problematic for those involved.
The basic data structure proposed in the ontology with FlowObject, Flow, ActivityType, and Activity is also meant to be relevant for other tools central to the domain of Industrial Ecology, notably Material Flow Analysis (MFA) and Agent-Based Modeling (ABM).
you need somebody to give you feed-back as you're trying to learn how to do this because there is a subtle difference between theoretical sampling and other kinds of purposeful sampling.
2017), and implications for professional practice (Song and de Jong 2013; Yakushko 2010).
11 Bynum WE, Varpio L, Lagoo J, Teunissen PW (2021) ‘I'm unworthy of being in this space': The origins of shame in medical students.
In table 1.1, the researcher tried to different the grounded theory approach from the rest of the qualitative approaches.
In the whole research process, the researcher is the one who knows the potential benefits and losses involved in an on-going research project.
However, that does not make these applications socio-technical in the original sense [34].
This is where the skill of AI interpretation becomes indispensable.
Qualitative research allows researchers to discern explicit and implicit processes in their data.
Extensive searching led listserv members to the conclusion that Atchison was fair-minded and was providing a legitimate and unbiased opportunity.
Unit of measurement (mass, volume, economic value)
From its early beginnings, system theory embraces both natural and artificial (man-made) systems.
As in the first phase, narratives/stories can also be used here.
I'm on wrong track-I don't care about the main concerns of clinical social workers in private practice.
As a scholar listens to an excerpt from an interview, they can analyze the relationship of the interviewer and interviewee, based on the tone and inflection present in the voices.
GROUNDED THEORY RECONSTRUCTED Although the influences of American pragmatism on grounded theory methodology are manifold, the impact of contemporary philosophy of science on Glaser and Strauss's writings is almost non-existent.
‘Theory' means that the objective of collecting and analysing the research data is to generate theory.
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
The preframework efforts of QDA block this theoretical sensitivity.
According to Strauss and Corbin, questions to ask regarding empirical grounding of the study are: (1) Are concepts generated?
Line-by-line coding helps grounded theorists to understand their research participants' experiences and perspectives.
In this regard, two critical articles were published: "A twenty-first-century Science" (Watts 2007) and "Computational social science" (Lazer et al.
Professionals must navigate these global interactions sensitively,
On a cultural front, the research community must evolve, transitioning from the siloed, individual-centric research ethos to a more inclusive, dialogic model that is holistic in its approach.
By correcting errors from the first interview, and thereby further training the program, subsequent accuracy will be even higher.
The Global LCA Data Access Network (GLAD) has recognized the need to enhance accessibility and interoperability of LCA datasets (GLAD, 2020).
There is always a perception of a perception as the conceptual level rises.
Giving voice to the spectrum: Report of the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Ethics Special Working Committee.
Their advantage is the possibility of synchronous and asynchronous teamwork and combining qualitative and quantitative methods classes.
Tacking back and forth between data and analysis helps to check the pertinence of their nascent ideas, raise the analytic level of those that hold up, and support them more fully.
Owners of these types of sites emphasize the convenience and minimal storage requirements that this offers users who can now access their information from any mobile device anytime, anywhere.
[34] Context must emerge as a relevant category or as a theoretical code like all other categories in a GT.
She has written, co-authored, or co-edited several books, including two award-winning works: Good Days, Bad Days: The Self in Illness and Time and Constructing Grounded Theory.
Although much of this understanding has yet to be developed, we can in the interim at least start this dialogue by sharing some of our own research experiences.
Furthermore, it may be an ethical violation of the child's confidentiality to seek parental consent to store the child's data for future use, particularly if the parent wishes to review the child's data before it is stored.
Generally, the CAQDAS software may use the four inter-coder agreement criteria based on the code occurrence, frequency of using code, importance (text covered by code), and overlapping codes in a text (two codes cover the same piece of text).
In Transformational Design Research, the conversation for design between designer and user is distinguished from the conversation between the designer-researcher and the scientific community.
We intend the ontology to be both specific enough to model the information contained in the data developed for LCSA and broad enough to be applicable to other data potentially useful for LCSA.
More recently, John Holland and others11 have produced a general theory of induction, which includes the development http://www.ed.uiuc.edu/EPS/PES-Yearbook/95_docs/haig.html (6 of 11)8/4/2006 9:04:24 AM
My goal is to alleviate the bane on good GT analysis brought on by those QDA senior researchers open to no other method, especially the GT method.
Although relational databases are easy to set up and maintain now, in future there will be challenges when we have silos of data.
The concepts, structures, components, and dimensions of the theories and the interactions and modelling between them are explained.
B., Conner, M., De Fruyt, F., De Houwer, J., Denissen, J.
The general approach is developed in progressively more detail in Glaser, Theoretical Sensitivity (Mill Valley: Sociology Press, 1978), and in Strauss, Qualitative Analysis for Social Scientists (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0018726706067080 Cavana, R.
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/50848843
This information was used to develop the competency questions.
It became a hallmark of grounded theory and has become widely adopted throughout qualitative inquiry.
Judging the quality of qualitative inquiry: Criteriology and relativism in action.
It also corrects the forcing of "pet" themes and ideas, unless they have emergent fit.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)
Researchers, therefore, must ensure that data, even when stripped of identifiable markers or replaced with pseudonyms, remains thoroughly anonymous and is immune to reverse-engineering tactics that could compromise participant identity.
Originality can take varied forms such as offering new insights, providing a fresh conceptualization of a recognized problem, and establishing the sig nificance of the analysis.
Another focused code, ‘self-doubting', had its roots in initial codes like ‘becoming insecure', ‘feeling self-worthlessness', ‘loss of self-confidence', and ‘getting bad self-confidence from being bullied', as indicated in Tables 1 and 2.
Abstract In this literature review paper, the researcher has done some efforts to identify and further to elaborate the basic components of a research methods chapter that are integral part of any research paper while conducting grounded theory approach.
Quantitative and qualitative research, with their distinctive paradigms, core concepts, foci, and methods, address different aspects of the situation to be researched.
The digital realm offers various innovative tools and methodologies that fundamentally alter the qualitative research landscape.
Furthermore, in line with the new framework, recommendations are listed in the final section of the report.
Efforts are made to describe, understand, and interpret; to explore and elucidate in depth.
In the second stage, a special filter is then applied in order to change the pitch and tone of all voices present in the recording into a single voice.
To test the ontology, we chose two established open-access datasets.
A recent philosophical work in this field is Aharon Kantorovich, Scientific Discovery (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1993).
Never deviate from the study introduction, sequence of questions, or question wording.
We found the total time taken dropped from 4-6 hours of transcription time for 1 hour of interview to about 1.5 hours of transcription time, which was a substantial time saving.
Future digital research infrastructure for qualitative researchers Our vision for a cohesive Canadian digital research infrastructure ecosystem is one that provides a flexible system for researchers who choose to store and share qualitative data and project materials while respecting the sensitivity of the data, the ethical commitments to their participants, and the epistemological integrity of their research.
143).Ethical issues are important for both quantitative and qualitative research, but ethical considerations are more important in qualitative research as qualitative research approaches often intrudes in participant's lives (Punch, 1998).
This amalgamation enriches the research process, allowing for more profound insights and broader applications.
It is very important for data gathering through interviews (Willis, 2007, p.
(2016), the BONSAI ontology avoids rigid definitions of concepts such as classifying terms based on their extrinsic properties (e.g., classifying a flow as a resource, waste, or emission) or determining a system boundary between the technosphere and the natural system.
(2021) analyzed the challenges of managing data to perform LCA in the construction industry and highlighted how the Semantic Web is the only technology designed for dynamic data modeling.
The motivation is brief, but it seems that for March and Smith, models are at the core.
Ethical issues with qualitative data (confidentiality, anonymity, downstream risks of being identified from qualitative data) Data ownership and sovereignty (e.g., participant informed consent and decision-making about their data ownership; data collected and produced by Indigenous communities) Preparing data for storage (from raw, unprocessed data to redacted, summarized, processed data) Determining the degree of sensitivity of their data Determining the level of restriction required when storing and sharing data Data attribution, terms of use and re-use, copyright
GT generates the outline through the sorting of memos by the sorting of the categories and properties in the memos into similarities, connections and conceptual orderings.
Data Organization and Analysis Due to issues of file size, all audio and video footage cannot be included in the final research product.
Memos present hypotheses about connections between categories and/or their properties and begin to integrate these connections with clusters of other categories to generate the theory.
YSTAFDB was developed from material stocks and flows data generated at the Center for Industrial Ecology at Yale University (Myers et al., 2019b).
The structure of the EXIOBASE supply table matrix is such that flows on the diagonal cells of the matrix are implicitly the DeterminingFlow for the Activity, while other dependent flows (often referred as by-products) are in cells outside the diagonal.
These stages can be briefly summarized as follows: Phase 1 - presenting the context of the qualitative study The context of the qualitative study is presented in the methodology section of the report.
The data conversion software7,8 developed in this study provides an initial template for researchers interested in integrating data with the Semantic Web.
The text on the arrows defines the properties or predicates that connect the classes.
Abstract Rationale: From education to healthcare and management processes, it is important to address the experience in health within its own complexity, context, and uniqueness.
Theoretical sampling and theoretical saturation contribute to the quality of the study by strengthening researchers' analysis and giving them material for making explicit claims about it.
In this type of sampling, researchers look for data that will inform their categories.
While collecting any kind of information or data from participants, the researcher should disclose all benefits and losses that may affect the participants (Punch, 1998).
Current issues: Challenges with digital research infrastructure for qualitative researchers There are several challenges and fundamental issues facing qualitative researchers engaging with digital research infrastructure to potentially store and share data openly for future use (e.g., for secondary analysis, re-analysis, teaching purposes, etc.).
Examples of such tools include web-based software for conducting interviews and software for online interview transcription.
Fenwick T, Nimmo GR (2015) Making visible what matters: sociomaterial approaches for research and practice in healthcare education.
?z a bont:Flow; bont:hasObjectType ?x; om2:hasUnit ?unit .
The authors of textbooks typically say [something like], ‘Oh, you don't have enough women; go get more.' No, that's not theoretical sampling.
In a collaborative context, the researcher must be willing to work in a framework of mutual support between peers and participate in the synergy of the group to organise complex tasks via communication.
For example, the class Flow contains the measure of an entity that is transferred.
Neuman (1991) differentiated the interpretivism and positivism philosophical paradigms.
Nursing Researc -Generating and Assessing Evidence for Nursing Practice.
Its capabilities are vast, segmenting text, image, sound, and video into manageable units and semantically indexing them for in-depth analysis.
In the end, while this interview did result in lengthy and well-articulated responses by the participant, and as a helpful by-product generated a comprehensive transcript of the interaction, it took nearly seven hours over the course of two evenings to complete.
As digital technologies became more pervasive, their influence seeped into academic research and investigation.
[43] 3.2 Getting started A good GT analysis starts right off with regular daily data collecting, coding and analysis.
• Analysis/design models of non-technical artefacts.
?activity rdfs:label ?label } What are the different FlowObjects in a given dataset?
Glaser and Strauss (1967) developed grounded theory by explaining the methods they used to construct their remarkable qualitative studies of death and dying in hospitals (Glaser & Strauss, 1965, 1968).
15309290, 2022, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jiec.13220 by Cochrane Uruguay, Wiley Online Library on [18/06/2025].
In recent years other independent efforts have developed LCA ontologies in relation to semantic models (Janowicz et al., 2015; Kuczenski et al., 2016; Takhom et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2015).
Hence, although my exposition of AEI method begins by mentioning problems, it should not be thought that problems mark the first step in the method.
Our focus is on the opportunities that the digital age offers as well as some of the impediments we have encountered that keep us from fully embracing those opportunities.
Although by now there is quite a substantial literature about design science, in the form of research articles and textbooks, a systematic investigation of the design artefact concept is still missing.
He emphasised that this shift affects the broader scientific community, not just qualitative research.
Understanding the dynamics among acculturative stress, coping, and growth: A grounded theory of the Korean immigrant adolescent experience.
Critical to supporting researchers' engagement with digital research infrastructure is the development and provision of training and information to make informed decisions about whether it is epistemologically and ethically possible to openly store and share their data.
A technical object is an artificial object (individual) that is made by humans for some purpose (intentionally) whose capacities are (in principle) exhaustively described by the physical laws and the intentional design.
More recent work on grounded theory rightly stresses the centrality of heuristics to methodology, and the constraint composition account of problems is strategically positioned within AEI method to facilitate the operation of such heuristics.
For a first-hand depiction of the comparative process, see Minas, Anglin, and Ribeiro (2018).
GT procedures sharpen the generated concepts systematically.
It can use any data, but obviously the favorite data to date is qualitative.
By immersing themselves in the dynamic realm of technology, researchers bridge the competency gap and bring innovative solutions that defy the constraints traditionally associated with digitisation.
In a Digital Society, qualitative research methodology can be implemented by extracting data from pre-existing digital platforms like forums, social media, and websites through web scraping techniques, or by employing digital tools designed for researchers that facilitate direct interaction with participants in their online environments.
It totally depends upon the relationship between researcher and how the researchers perceive that reality (Creswell, 2007; Gratton & Jones, 2004; Punch, 1998).
The descriptions also include digital artifacts from final research products in web-based, CD-ROM and DVD formats.
The primary examples of constructs used to model data into RDF format are: ∙ Resource: All things described by RDF are resources.
Including this information is not essential to perform LCSA.
Professionals must be competent in reviewing AI-generated outputs, identifying potential inaccuracies, and ensuring precise products, like transcriptions.
We used SKOS predicates skos:broader and skos:narrower to link the flows and activities related to phosphorus in YSTAFDB to flows and activities for fertilizer production and use in EXIOBASE (See Figure 2).
In addition, the empirical grounding of the theory led to: (a) workability (Glaser 1998) as the developed middle-range theory contributes to explain the link between bullying victimization and mental health problems in the literature (e.g., Klomek, Sourander, and Elonheimo 2015) from the voice and perspectives of the participants; (b) abstract understanding (Charmaz, 2017) as it contributes to increase our understanding of meanings and actions and how victims construct them; and (c) relevance (Glaser 1998) and resonance (Charmaz 2014) as participants in the study and other victims of school bullying could recognize most or all processes included in the grounded theory of double victimizing.
However, the notion of constant comparison contributes little to figuring out whether the inductive inference in question is enumerative, eliminative, abductive or of some other form.
The second, and related, misconception involves the belief that the problems component of method is a temporal phase that is dealt with by the researcher, who then moves to another phase, and so on.
Integrating CAQDAS programs with languages like Python or R is a testament to this shift.
They can leverage technology to record interviews, create transcripts, and use mobile devices to organise the sequence of answers.
The meaning of the sign DOG in English is the evocation of the concept of dog shared by English-speaking people.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)
A software program is used to change the internal state of the computer [35].
Another implication is the suggestion of ‘multi-layered reading and analysis'.
The theory of induction is outlined in John Holland, et al., Induction: Processes of Inference, Learning and Discovery (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1986).
As a critical researcher, my initial impulse was a desire to mete out justice by exposing these ‘monstrous' families; however, very early on the sensibilities of constructivist grounded theory with its emphasis on scrutinizing our interpretations of data and engaging in sustained reflexivity persuaded me to analyze the data in more nuanced ways and to even interrogate my affective responses.
A subject and an object can be defined as entities, while the predicate defines the relation between the two entities.
In the current paper, the issues and challenges raised herein concern primarily data storage in repositories or databases, and associated data management processes (Government of Canada, 2020 ).
As Costa and Costa (2017) suggested, conducting research in digital environments can offer fresh perspectives to traditional research methodologies.
 Lack of information and training about using digital research infrastructures in an ethical manner in qualitative inquiry.
Issues like computer viruses, loss of anonymity, the spread of fake news, and spam emails plague this information age.
As digital tools erase geographical boundaries, cultural awareness and empathy become more critical.
This class defines multiple properties on the type and direction of flows.
[68] If the analyst omits sorting, the theory will be linear, thin and less than fully integrated.
article will clarify my concerns with the continuing enthusiasm but misunderstood embrace of GT by
But the data is already public: On the ethics of research in Facebook.
A primary component of this skill set is technical proficiency.
An example of LOD is Dbpedia, which contains the data of the information boxes within Wikipedia (DBpedia, 2019).
Concluding Practical guides on the analysis, interpretation, and reporting of qualitative data are useful tools for researchers who will work in this area.
According to Creswell (2007) qualitative research got a distinct method to explore a social or human problem or phenomenon.
In Atchison's case, the targeting of sex buyers came through identification of geographicallybased networking sites catering to the interests of members of the sex-buying and -selling communities.
Such purposes include exploring a new area of study (Bronk 2012) explicating and understanding a major process (Qin and Lykes 2006), illumi nating the situations of people denied a public voice (Ayón et al.
The enlightened eye: Qualitative inquiry and the enhancement of educational practice.
Glaser and Strauss rejected quantitative researchers' criticisms of qualitative inquiry as being unsystematic idiosyncratic, biased, and intuitive.
Far too often we have heard the mantra that "nothing is private" on the Internet, without any serious consideration of what it would take for someone to intercept or steal a piece of identifiable information about someone in the context of an actual research project.
Furthermore, the research questions and literature review by it-self leads and support for conceptual thinking and theory building rather than empirical testing of the theory and this type of study follows an inductive theory building approach.
CSS is referred to as the field of social science that uses computational approaches in studying social phenomena.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychsport.2017.12.010 Wemigwans, J.
A good grounded theory is one that is: (1) inductively derived from data, (2) subjected to http://www.ed.uiuc.edu/EPS/PES-Yearbook/95_docs/haig.html (1 of 11)8/4/2006 9:04:24 AM
To gain resonance, researchers must fit their data-gathering strategies to illuminate their participants' experi ence.
The future promises a closer synergy between digital tools and research methodologies, opening doors to deeper insights and revolutionary findings.
It is therefore not inappropriate to characterize an artefact as an interface [30].
Such advancements cater to tasks like data pre-processing, automatic coding, and deeper analyses.
Skinners (Ed.), Qualitative Reseaerch in Sports Management (1st ed., p.
A natural object is a physical object that is not an artificial object.
Vibha Pathak, Bijayini Jena1, Sanjay Kalra2 Departments of Clinical Research, 1Nutrition, and 2Endocrinology, Bharti Hospital and BRIDE, Karnal, Haryana, India Address for correspondence: Dr.
Lincoln (Eds.), Collecting and Interpreting Qualitative Materials (pp.
London, BMJ: Qualitative Research in Health Care; 1996.
The traditional distinction between data and information can be interpreted as a distinction between a technical object (the data item, as it may be written on multiple locations), and the artefact to which these data items conform and that specifies the attributed capacity and use plan of the data.
The authors thank those in attendance for their comments and questions.
However, the potential to use this structure to link to external web resources and supporting media elements is apparent.
Twelve new predicates were also defined in the BONSAI ontology.
Not only do phenomena give scientific explanations their point (without the detection of phenomena it would be difficult to know what to explain), they also, on account of their generality and stability, become the appropriate focus of scientific explanation (systematic explanation of more ephemeral events would be extremely difficult, if not impossible).
An instructive examination of scientific problems, and an endorsement of their constraintcomposition conception is provided by Thomas Nickles, "What Is a Problem That We Might Solve It?" Synthese 47, no.1 (1981): 85-118.
This corresponds partially to the UFO definition of resource as ‘an object participating in an action'.
We further demonstrate the utility of the ontology by using it to integrate data relevant to sustainability assessments, such as EXIOBASE and the Yale Stocks and Flow Database to the Semantic Web.
The questionnaire asked about their past experiences with bullying and their willingness to be interviewed about it.
A predicates that links an IRI to a literal (e.g., a string, number, date, time) is further defined to have a Datatype property.
A programming language provides the constructs (basic components) from which the source code can be assembled according to certain rules (use plan), that is, the syntax.
And at the end of the interview, the researcher should assure the interviewee of the confidentiality of interview data.
Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice 90 (4):567-85.
To make the bridge to the organizational context, we need I/O devices that are able to create text objects outside the machine.
1.1 The Research Philosophy of the Study Conceptual thinking and theory building is interrelated with the qualitative research method approach - grounded theory (Glaser & Strauss, 1967).
Theoretical sampling is just one source of grounding during the constant comparative method.
In a ‘grounded theory' approach in which the researchers try to highlight and explore employee's perception regarding some phenomenon e.g.
Study should have pre‐determined methods to nullify research bias.
Often they selectively code from the start with preconceived categories.
Glaser's (1978, 1992) position often comes close to traditional positivism, with its assumptions of an objective, external reality, a neutral observer who discovers data, reductionist inquiry of manageable research problems, and objectivist rendering of data.
The research problem and its delimitation are discovered.
If data are collected through, for example, in-depth interviews, participant observation and/or narrative writing, additional interviews, writing, or observation are planned and conducted.
These are questions that can be addressed when video and audio data are included in a final research product.
2.2 Constructivist Grounded Theory The Strauss (1987) and Strauss and Corbin (1998) work turned the direction of grounded theory from positivist paradigm towards a more constructivist paradigm.
Examples of artificial objects are not only hammers, cars and software, but also a footprint in the sand, or production waste.
In this way, they experience a practice in which they develop and transform by learning from concrete experiences, and through this, they transform both the practice and the context in which it takes place.
The data may be baseline, vague, interpreted or proper-line.
They are all technical objects, but they have different relationships to artefacts.
In contrast, we start with a design process that ensures the look of the survey is appealing to the audience we seek.
This theoretical code should be written and sorted into the appropriate pile with the substantive code.
Palys is also a technophile insofar as interest and educability go, but does not possess Atchison's level of expertise in being able to do the scripting and programming required to make them run.
This worrisome accuracy of the data focuses on its subjectivity, its interpretative nature, its plausibility, the data voice and its constructivism.
Coupled with this is the commitment to ongoing learning.
Thus, properly formulated, grounded theories should be taken as grounded in phenomena, not data.
15309290, 2022, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jiec.13220 by Cochrane Uruguay, Wiley Online Library on [18/06/2025].
The generated theory explains the preponderance of behavior in a substantive area with the prime mover of this behavior surfacing as the main concern of the primary participants.
Our specialist explained to us in detail and performed a varicocele examination.
The mediation of research and analysis via digital technology is becoming a norm, subtly shifting perceptions of qualitative analysis and its execution.
The design takes place in a conversation between user and designer - as such, it can be requested, proposed, accepted etc.
?unit rdfs:label ?unitLabel } Activities where a specific FlowObject is an output
Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
Emerging technologies are revolutionizing how researchers collaborate on projects, transcending social, cultural, and geographical boundaries.
Grounded theory research: Procedures, canons, and evaluative criteria.
Furthermore, we defined the spatiotemporal information associated with Activity and Agent.
Creation of initial codes: First, the text is segmented, labelled, and coded through repeated readings.
The analysis process is carried out through the template prepared and an example of such a template is given in Table 1.
A model to explain suicide by self-immolation among Iranian women.
And at the end of the day, everyone got their wish.
He distinguished it from the population in these words that ‘The abstract idea of a large group of many cases from which a researcher draws a sample and to which results from a sample are generalized' (Neuman, 2011, p.
How the I/O device, software program and processor interact exactly is not in the scope of our analysis, but one way of viewing it is that the three are assembled into a new artefact, the IS application.
Phase 2 - understanding and presenting in context When writing the findings section, the themes and subthemes that emerge as a result of the analysis are presented with sample phrases.
Ideally, sample represents the whole population on the characteristics of interest (Burns & Grove, 2009).
By doing so, I realized that my quest to ‘right' this injustice and free the interviewees sounded eeringly similar to the savior complex for which I had critiqued white transnational researchers.
These datasets can be accessed by the machine-readable endpoint using SPARQL, a semantic query language.
One of the most profound shifts brought about by the digital age is the transformation of collaboration in research.
The most important trap at this point is to make a superficial reading and analysis by foregrounding existing theories, and in this way, reproducing what is already present in theory.
‘What grounded theory is and should be is contested.
Department of Sociology, Sonoma State University, Rohnert Park, Sonoma, USA; bDepartment of Behavioural Sciences and Learning, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden ABSTRACT
The Semantic Web is an extension of the current World Wide Web (WWW), in which information is given a well-defined meaning using ontologies.
LOD must be in a machine-readable format, that is, data have some form of well-defined structure in contrast to natural language text, so as to be automatically searched, found, interpreted, shared, and reused across applications, organizations, and communities (Kamdar et al., 2019).
When it is adopted, co-opted, and corrupted by QDA research, a close look at the work often shows that the QDA researcher is tinkering with the GT method.
Notes on contributors Kathy Charmaz is professor emerita of sociology at Sonoma State University.
The specification is usually a composite object, consisting of several text objects.
Credibility begins with having sufficient relevant data for asking incisive questions about the data, making systematic comparisons throughout the research process, and developing a thorough analysis.
Researchers in these contexts need access to infrastructures where protocols for digitization, storage, and access can be co-created and negotiated, not dictated.
He added that ‘It is the moral and professional obligation of the individual researcher to be ethical even when research participants are unaware of or unconcerned about ethics'.
However, the digital era has not come without its drawbacks.
We consider IS artefacts to be research objects or units of analysis - what the design knowledge is about.
When he finished, he looked up for the first time and said in a bold and clear tone that he wanted to have children and would do whatever needed to be done.
We Avoiding attention; have to bully him even more!' So, the best thing was to be quiet and not be noticed.
The framework model, which consists of three phases and seven steps, is described below.
Additionally, it is utilised to help with record-keeping, organise and manage qualitative data, give an audit trail, improve and show methodological rigour, and allow researchers to advance from theory creation to description (Bringer et al.
Researchers must expand their enlightened eyes (Eisner, 1998) to critique and edit multiple formats of data.
Neither of us has a degree in computing science; both are self-taught.
https://doi.org/10.18584/iipj.2017.8.2.1 Sandelowski, M.
There are over 18 theoretical coding families of which process is only one.
There has been a growing interest in research collaboration in recent years, and different terminologies have emerged to describe this phenomenon.
In that tiny room, eight of us sat on stools by the door and waited for the new patient to arrive.
business in the health food industry that was undertaking in-house interview research with health food retailers regarding various aspects of the industry.
As for any technical object [32], the intended use must be grasped by the user.
Eric: Well, if I said something, if I tried to take some space, then they would just say, ‘We have to put him down!
Non-compliance with these regulations can result in significant fines and damage to reputation.
Codes Work orientation Intrusive computer and processes Constant patient care, fatigue Failure to see the situation, emotions, and culture of the patient and his/her relatives: privacy, shyness, shame, inability to have children in the culture, patriarchy?
Despite a lot of criticism, (Strauss, 1987; Strauss & Corbin, 1990, 1998) version of grounded theory is more famous than the earlier version of grounded theory.
Writing memos in GT has to do with immediate recording of generated theoretical conceptual ideas grounded in data, not the mystical-perhaps conjectural-insights to which MORSE refers to.
Contextuality and reflexivity: It is one of the indispensable headings of the method section in qualitative studies.
Be sure that none of us wanted to be in that room after seeing their discomfort.
International Criminal Justice Review, 11(1), 1-33.
Achieving a delicate balance between capitalising on digital advantages and upholding research integrity necessitates a profound comprehension and reflective implementation of these digital techniques.
Summary: Going Digital and Collaborative but Staying Qualitative As the wave of digitisation and datafication intensifies, the domain of social sciences, particularly the qualitative research methodology, is evolving into a predominantly datadriven sphere.
The software program can be part of an IS application that is used in a work system - the use plan of the program refers to the work practice, including resources and norms.
In this way, the analyst can continually adjust the control of data collection to ensure the data's relevance to the emerging theory.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press
The man started talking saying that his name was M.
However, the uptake of Semantic Web modeling, which could overcome these limitation, in the LCSA domain has been limited.
As the scale and dynamics of these technological changes evolve, so does the methodology employed in social sciences, especially in qualitative research.
A class for ReferenceUnit was introduced to annotate the common unit to which all quantitative flow data of an activity are proportional to.
While Charmaz (2014) added that grounded theory is focused on inductive strategies for dataanalysis.
Below we outline key considerations for a digital research infrastructure to support qualitative researchers who may wish to engage in open storage and sharing of qualitative data and materials.
Within the range of topics covered, the primary ethical issue we see is confidentiality and the impact that digital technologies have on the security of data.
Interviewer: What did you do when you got bullied at school?
With sorting, data and ideas are theoretically ordered.
Flow would be an edge of the graph, while Activity would In YSTAFDB, an output of 2684 megagram (tonnes) of be vertices.
Paper presented at the International Conference on ED-MEDIA, Honolulu, HI.
Abusive Supervision and Negative Employee Outcomes.
Participants who came across information about the survey quickly posted messages about the research in the various discussion forums and these posts resulted in conversational "threads" where members of the community shared their thoughts about the "legitimacy" of the research and their desire to participate.
In constructivist grounded theory (Charmaz 2014), interviewing is not considered as efforts to mirror reality but as emergent interactions through a mutual exploration of the interviewee's experiences and perspectives.
Mobile technologies, Cloud collaboration, Big Data analytical systems, Natural Language Processing, Text Mining, Neural Networks algorithms, and the Internet of Things offer incredible and unseen individual and social opportunities, driving economic growth, improving citizens' lives and efficiency in many areas of our lifeworld, i.e., transforming the way we live and interact.
Reflective, narrative writings, and reflective researcher diaries written by the researcher are some of them.
In traditional system sciences, models are made of social, material, or socio-material situations, conceptualized as systems (cf.
Subsequently, they compare their final category or categories with the existing literature.
The explicit demand that the solution be found arises from the goals of the research program, the pursuit of which leads, it is to be hoped, to filling an http://www.ed.uiuc.edu/EPS/PES-Yearbook/95_docs/haig.html (2 of 11)8/4/2006 9:04:24 AM
This can be supplemented with other user-generated material such as documents, which allows the researcher to introduce vocabulary that is unique to his/her interests and research.
The management view on Information Systems sees the object as much broader, including the business processes that use the IT, the humans involved and the organizational structure around it.
Sorting generates more memos-often on higher conceptual levels-furthering and condensing the theory.
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
Digital methods are part of a computational turn in the contemporary humanities and social sciences.
This standard depiction of abductive inference focuses on its logical form only and, as such, is of limited value in understanding the research process unless it is conjoined with a set of regulative constraints that enable us to view abduction as a pattern of inference, not just to any explanations, but to the most plausible explanations.
It is vital to note that one semantic ontology cannot capture all aspects of a domain.
When necessary, a new method or tool is included in the design to collect supporting data or to triangulate the data.
Use the list as a resource, not as a substitute for rigorous research.
But, it is also unfortunate that, in their formulations of grounded theory as general scientific method, Glaser and Strauss have continued to ignore pertinent developments in philosophical methodology.
Palys cut his academic teeth in the days of mainframes, and he is one of those who took his dissertation data to the computing centre in boxes full of 80-character IBM punch cards.
It is based on concepts that emerged from analysis and that appear to have relevance to the evolving theory...the aim of theoretical sampling is to maximise opportunities to compare events, incidents, or happenings to determine how a category varies in terms of its properties and dimensions'.
Journal of the Research Center for Educational Technology (RCET) Vol.
Researchers need to be responsible for the care of their data and cannot do so when they are at the whim of their cloud service provider's use policies.
Dr MAY engages in descriptive capture in QDA fashion and attacks the main tenant of GT, that theory can emerge.
http://www.ed.uiuc.edu/EPS/PES-Yearbook/95_docs/haig.html (10 of 11)8/4/2006 9:04:24 AM
In this section, we discuss the general validity of the proposed ontology, the opportunities and challenges of linking data to the Semantic Web, and suggestions for future work.
Specifies the reference unit that the amount of a BalanceableProperty of a Flow is proportional to
prepared in any language, with language of administration changed at the click of a button, voice command, or touch, for use in multi-cultural and international research.
Street corner society: The social structure of an Italian slum.
In this way, both the relevance of the analysis outputs is tested (verification, confirmation) and the outputs are finalized.
Data Analysis This is another area where much has been written and where software such as NVivo and ATLAS.ti clearly market themselves (Auld et al., 2007; Crowley, Harre, & Tagg, 2002; Durian, 2002; Lewis, 2004; Smyth, 2006).
However, grounded theory methodology embodies a conception of scientific inquiry that is far removed from such a naive account.
The respondents should be guaranteed of the privacy and secrecy of the data and results.
Changing incidents (indicators) and thereby generating new properties of a code can only go so far before the analyst discovers saturation of ideas through interchangeability of indicators.
It starts with abstract concepts and to explain and understand data.
Data as a strategic resource: Self-determination, governance, and the data challenge for Indigenous nations in the United States.
These innovations have positioned CAQDAS at the forefront of the modern qualitative research revolution, striking a balance between the cherished methods of yesteryears and the technological potential of today.
Their position moves to post-positivism because they also propose giving voice to their respondents, representing them as accurately as possible, discovering acknowledging how respondents' views of reality conflict with their own, and recognizing art as well as science in the analytic product and process'.
The result of the lumping is a cursory default remodeling of GT to a "kind" of QDA.
Such relationships can be semantically described using mapping predicates such as skos:broader, skos:narrower, skos:closeMatch, and skos:exactMatch given by the SKOS ontology.
It is, indeed, hard to recognize GT procedures in this quote by MORSE.
This type of research report can be illustrated from a narrative embedded in DVD format (Banister, 2003).
In the ‘Findings' section, re-narrating one to two representative experiences in the words of participants in a way that vividly reflects the experience and the context in which the experience was lived.
We agree with Tracy's (2010) ‘big tent' markers of quality in qualitative research: a worthy topic, rich rigor, sincerity, credibility, resonance, significant contribution, ethics, and meaningful coherence (p.
On the other hand, it is used to build a database system, a technical
Theoretical sorting of the memos is the key to formulating the theory for presentation or writing.
I never thought that I didn't want to live anymore.
The grounded theory method offers useful strategies to develop researchers' theoretical analyses.
Corpus-based text analysis from a qualitative perspective: A closer look at NVivo.
Retrieved from http://www.smeal.psu.edu/cdt/ebrcpubs/res_papers/2004_02.pdf Durian, D.
The criteria of CRESWELL's continuum organize methods according to when theory is used in research, varying from before the study begins to post-study.
This goes beyond just using digital tools; it involves discerning which tool is best suited for a specific task and evaluating the credibility of online resources.
Navigating this curve requires patience, determination, and often a willingness to venture outside one's comfort zone.
Retrieved from http://bostoncollegesubpoena.wordpress.com/2012/01/02/researcher-hits-out-at-bostoncollege-in-ira-interviews-row/ Smyth, R.
These are ‘single-layered' and ‘multi-layered' reading and analysis.
Sensitivity to these conditions can assist social movement organizers in mobilizing crowds.
A similar situation can be mentioned for qualitative studies.
Representation of qualitative researchers should be supported through membership on the NDRIO Researcher Committee and/or consultations with qualitative researchers working from various epistemological positions and across a variety of disciplines.
They enable scholars to efficiently organise, categorise and analyse vast amounts of textual, audio, and visual data.
The Digital Society, as defined by Schwarz (2021), is an emergent and interdisciplinary research domain that arises from integrating advanced technologies into our societal fabric and cultural norms.
In addition, these methods have been successfully used to identify the problems with online data, such as the unsustainability of web services and the instability of data streams, where APIs are reconfigured or cease to function.
Bruner J (2006) A narrative model of self-construction.
This convergence has given rise to the new interdisciplinary field of Digital Qualitative Sociology (Bryda 2014).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press
4 Exemplars have made stellar contributions to grounded theory.
They facilitate every phase of the research process, drawing on various tools, possibly already familiar to many researchers and providing practical case studies drawn from actual research.
understand what kind of experience is lived in what kind of context, how the parties relate to this context, how and in what way this context and the way they relate affect the experience, and what the consequences are.
See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
SSC is the field in which computational methodologies are created to assist in explanations of social phenomena.
abstract it is often overlooked that there is also an aggregation dimension [31].
In our wordings, what is meant here is that the evolution of the organization is not determined by physical laws mobilized by intentional design but includes human creative intervention.
For researchers to excel in computer-assisted data analysis, proficiency in these fast-evolving digital tools and methods is imperative.
Inserting a Back link that would return to the point of departure would make this feature more user-friendly.
Qualitative researchers often combine multiple types of data to inform their analyses and interpretations of the phenomenon or topic under investigation.
Analyzing social settings: A guide to qualitative observation and analysis (4th ed.).
Carvalho, V, Almeida, J., Fonsceca, C., Guizzardi, G.: Extending the Foundations of Ontology-Based Conceptual Modeling with a Multi-level Theory.
The principle of ‘garbage in, garbage out' is very much applicable to grounded theory, particularly considering its empha sis on data and groundedness.
The publication, while web-based, is still functioning in a fairly static state.
There is considerable participant burden beyond the end of the original study that may be required for participants to make an informed decision about how their data is to be stored (e.g., reviewing redacted transcripts, photos, videos, to ensure that they are comfortable with information that is being stored indefinitely).
15309290, 2022, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jiec.13220 by Cochrane Uruguay, Wiley Online Library on [18/06/2025].
The core variable can be any kind of theoretical code-a process, a condition, two dimensions, a consequence, a range and so forth.
Thus, the original description is subsumed by the analysis.
For example, criticality and recyclability could be additional properties of Flows.
Thagard's theory of explanatory coherence has a number of virtues: it satisfies the demand for justification by appeal to coherence considerations rather than foundations; it takes theory evaluation to be a comparative matter and one that is centrally concerned with explanation; and it can be implemented in a computer program while still leaving an important place for judgment by the researcher.
However, the latter two are not technical objects, as they are not intentionally made, and have no use plan.
A grounded theory of this double victimizing was finally constructed in which the other categories were parts of the double victimizing or in other
This dataset is published as a supplementary material on zenodo.org alongside the main publication (Myers et al., 2019a, 2019b).
They connected credibility to researchers' confidence in their own knowledgeability based on carefully studying and analyzing the actual field, and gaining systematic knowledge of the data.
These diverse datasets call for nuanced methods of interpretation and understanding.
All data are constantly compared to generate concepts.
Three broad categories of qualitative research of interest exists in clinical research: Observational studies, interview studies and documentary/textual analysis of various written records.[2] Qualitative research gives voice to the participants in the study.[1] It permits the participants to share their experiences of the effects of the drug of interest.
We conclude by offering guidelines that graduate and postgraduate students and beginners in constructivist grounded theory can use as a checklist while conducting their work.
It © 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
Constructing grounded theory method in accordance with AEI affords us a better position from which to confront the central methodological question, "How is effective inquiry possible?" For a response to this essay, see Kinach.
This is especially so when conducting research with small populations, or those with distinct, unique experiences or expertise.
Thorough vetting of third-party providers and software used in the research process is essential to mitigate risks.
Today, digitality primarily manifests in the ability to store, search, and categorise information, exemplified by tools and platforms such as the World Wide Web, Google search engines, and Big Data repositories.
One could say that an artefact is a system, as indeed the elements of a composite artefact have a function in the whole, so cannot be characterized exhaustively on their own.
Two types of explanations are given under this heading.
In contrast, evaluation studies in the domain of Information Management typically look at the end product (as blackbox) in some use context.
Supply and Use tables in EXIOBASE have a format of products by activities.
(For further reading, see Strauss and Corbin 1998, pp.
As science in general abstracts from the concrete, so design knowledge abstracts from specific application contexts.
This process may be described as collaborative knowledge production in computer-assisted qualitative data analysis and digitally supported research.
To allow automatic transformation and integration of datasets by a common set of data converters, we developed a common intermediate CSV format.
In this study, we explicitly linked the proposed ontology with the Semantic Web, including linking it to other established ontologies.
She does not acknowledge the constant comparative method by which theory emerges from all data.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Between positivism and postmodernism: implications for methods.
A general understanding of artefact in Design Science is that is an object made by humans with the intention that it is used to address a practical problem [3,18].
Although Simon is not very explicit, he seems to regard a design object as more specific than an artificial object, witness the fact that he views markets being the result of a social evolution process as artificial objects but without a designer.
The make plan makes it possible that (sooner or later) there is more than one instance (so if an inventor construes a technical object but there is no make plan and it cannot be reproduced, it is not an artefact instance).
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
CAQDAS was primarily linked with leveraging technology for quantitative content analysis (Berelson 1984) and Grounded Theory (Glaser and Strauss 1965).
Themes and subthemes are constructed specific to the context in question.
Grounded theory is typically presented as an approach to doing qualitative research, in that its procedures are neither statistical, nor quantitative in some other way.
For a perspicacious formulation of this brand of realism see Clifford Hooker, A Realistic Theory of Science (New York: State University of New York Press, 1987).
People are now able to connect, interact, and share resources with existing friends, as well as maintain ties with former friends and other contacts who are no longer a part of their current lives "offline." Wireless network devices-such as the iPhone, Blackberry, and phones using Google's Android OS-have made it even easier to connect with a wide variety of strongly and weakly tied members of an individual social network or community because of these devices' portability, ease of use, and removal of barriers from information flow between people no matter the distance.
Qualitative research is based upon the observations and interpretations of people's perception of different events and it takes the snapshot of the people's perception in a natural setting (Guba, 1990; Guba& Lincoln, 1994; Newman, 1994).
CAQDAS, Digitality, and Collaborative Working We live in digital culture, meaning digitality encourages us to connect, collaborate, communicate, and participate in global social networks.
Initial attacks antedated double victimizing, and when double victimizing ended in terms of bullying exit, after-effects of bullying included a lingering internal victimizing.
The result is a lumping and confusion of GT with QDA.
Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences, 273-307 (2009).
Thus, the prerequisite for reliable qualitative analysis is efficient and consistent data management, for which adopting digital technologies and appropriate CAQDAS software is natural and obvious.
Memo construction differs from writing detailed description.
Creswell JW (2013) Qualitative inquiry and research design: choosing among five approaches.
2010; Tartas and Muller Mirza 2007), international (Akkerman et al.
15309290, 2022, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jiec.13220 by Cochrane Uruguay, Wiley Online Library on [18/06/2025].
connoisseurship in this new genre is important and edits also require a sensitivity to ethical responsibilities, such as intrusion and voice (Rosenstein & Sheva, 2002).
While AI tools bring advanced capabilities, they are not without flaws (Costa 2023).
This can open our eyes to new aspects of the study and help modify the design of the clinical trial.
We are especially distrustful of university-based web and data servers, which are often terribly vulnerable to hacking, and typically subject to use policies that give the university the right to inspect any information and to manage the information in the event that a challenge to research confidentiality arises.
We regard the algorithm as an artefact (possibly a DSR artefact) and a software program as a kind of algorithm.
In my opinion, grounded theory is best defined as a research strategy whose purpose is to generate theory from data.
However, some resources are consumed in the use (e.g.
[7] Over the years since the initial publication of "Discovery of Grounded Theory" (GLASER & STRAUSS, 1967), the transcendent nature of GT as a general research methodology has been subsumed by the fervent adoption of GT terminology and selective application of discrete aspects of GT methodology into the realm of QDA research methodology.
From a Computer Science perspective, the Information System is the information technology that does data processing.
See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
As Barbour (2001) observes, using checklists risks becoming a methodological crutch that avoids deep engagement with the method.
First, he or she must have the personal and temperamental bent to maintain analytic distance, tolerate confusion and regression while remaining open, trusting to preconscious processing and to conceptual emergence.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/104973299129122199 Glaser, B.
The reader is to keep in mind that this paper is about GT and how to extract it from this remodeling.
At best, a few GT procedures are borrowed out of context.
Thus, competency questions allow to verify the appropriateness of the model against the stored data.
Finally, explanations are judged more coherent if they are supported by analogy to theories that scientists already find credible.
As qualitative methodologies have been evolving, the world of information technologies has been expanding, as well.
In facing these challenges, researchers must continuously strive to reconcile cutting-edge digital methodologies with fundamental research ethics, research principles and qualitative data security.
They studied the situations of Chinese women graduate students in the United States and discovered the basic psychological process of gaining self-understanding through reweaving a fragmented self.
Meanwhile, there is not, to our knowledge, even one computer on campus that has a university-funded qualitative data analysis program like NVivo on it, even though we have located an extensive group of individuals across at least eight different disciplines who would be interested in seeing the university invest in leases, so that learning qualitative data analysis 363
Charmaz has recently published The Social Self and Everyday Life: Understanding the World through Symbolic Interactionism with co-authors Scott R.
The code conceptualizes the underlying pattern of a set of empirical indicators within the data.
Elsevier represents only one major publishing venue.
looked up at us in horror for the first time since she entered the room.
By contrast, Glaser and Strauss hold a dynamic perspective on theory construction.
In this article, we emphasize quality in grounded theory studies that aim for theory construction, despite whether they also serve other goals.
He further differentiated the initial sampling from the theoretical sampling as the researchers usually mixed it up.
However, although they offer some thoughtful remarks about research problems, they do not give the matter systematic attention.4 In fact, their comments contain a number of misunderstandings that are characteristic of problems thinking -- misunderstandings that a constraint composition view of research problems, operating within the ambit of AEI method, is conceptually positioned to avoid.
become laced with QDA requirements thereby defaulting their rigorous use to a QDA burden.
Includes both human activities (e.g., activities for production and consumption, market activities, and stock accumulation activities) and environmental mechanisms (e.g., atmospheric energy balance, deposition, pollination).
As a more specific model, the stages in Ajjawi and Higgs' six-stage model for hermeneutic analysis are as follows: immersion (pre-interpreting and getting a general sense of the data); understanding (deeper understanding and coding through the participant's own statements; abstraction (identifying subthemes); synthesis and theme development; and illumination and illustration of phenomena and integration and critique of findings within the research team and externally (confirming the appropriateness of the themes and reporting) (Ajjawi & Higgs, 2007; Bynum et al., 2021).
This article includes only minimal examples of hyperlinking, providing the reader with links to bibliographic and footnote information, only.
Benefits of enhancing digital research infrastructure for qualitative researchers There are several benefits of enhancing the digital research infrastructure for qualitative researchers.
Domain experts, in our case, were members of the BONSAI community who actively work with different tools and databases used in industrial ecology.5 We asked the experts how they use the specific databases and the kind of data information they would like to extract from the databases.
These now boast enhanced analytical capabilities and foster a more collaborative environment for research (Costa 2016).
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)
The analyst begins by coding the data in every way possible-"running the data open." From the start, the analyst asks a set of questions-"What is this data a study of?" "What category does this incident indicate?" "What is actually happening in the data?" "What is the main concern being faced by the participants?" and "What accounts for the continual resolving of this concern?" These questions keep the analyst theoretically sensitive and transcending when analyzing, collecting and coding the data.
The make plan can take different forms, for instance, as a blueprint or a recipe.
During the initial settlement of the Internet, virtual communities of like-minded people congregated using utilities such as Usenet (newsgroups), Internet Relay Chat (IRC), e-lists, and bulletin board systems (BBSs).
output flows, when all these measures are expressed in Examples of quantities that are not balanceable the same unit.
Iivari [17] distinguished seven functions: to automate, to augment, to mediate, to inform, to entertain, to create art, to accompany.
They continue with the analysis and interpretation of the data through multiple readings.
EXIOBASE has locations referred to as "RoW Asia and Pacific." This is not a formalized description of a geographic location and hence unavailable in the instances given in Schema ontology.
These methods can use, for example, computational algorithms embedded in digital devices or computer language objects such as HTML or XML hyperlinks, tags, timestamps, likes, shares, and retweets to learn how people communicate, their opinions, and how they behave online.
Australian Journal of Advanced Nursing 22 (3):48-52.
Qualitative research Sir, Scientific research is based upon finding a solution to a particular problem one can identify.
the identification by developing, for instance, mathematical models of the artefact or by accumulating experimental results about its performance.
These are minimal standards and are subject to interpretation (e.g., what does ‘unnecessary' mean in a specific situation?).
E-mail: shahid.khan@monash.edu Received: August 21, 2014
Graduate education in psychology: Current trends and recommendations for the future.
Memos help the analyst to raise the data to a conceptual level and develop the properties of each category that begin to define them operationally.
Supporting artefacts- formal languages, constructs and patterns
Robert Thornberg is professor of education at Linköping University.
• Perform the design always in conversation with actual or potential users.
(2) Understanding: The theory should make sense and be understandable to non-researchers working or living in the substantive area.
This software provides researchers with a robust platform to analyse qualitative data meticulously and efficiently.
‘Rather than using these focused codes as the final frame, however, Thornberg et al.
http://www.ed.uiuc.edu/EPS/PES-Yearbook/95_docs/haig.html (8 of 11)8/4/2006 9:04:24 AM
March & Smith [23] mention constructs, models, methods and instantiations as IS design research artefacts, where "method" includes algorithms.
Now the question is that what should be the size of sample, it depends upon the type of research we are going to conduct wether its quantitative or qualitative research.
Therefore, understanding and interpreting the situations, processes, and outcomes of these experiences requires being open to the narratives of individuals, teams, institutions, and communities.
In our view, the issues are caused by a lack of attention to the design itself.
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/ Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum: Qualitative Social Research (ISSN 1438-5627)
Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five traditions (2nd ed.).
In the past decade, qualitative research, especially multimedia digital data, has benefited from developing and advancing software tools that support most core qualitative methodological techniques.
Journal of the Research Center for Educational Technology (RCET) Vol.
Theoretical sampling and theoretical saturation depend upon pursuing the iterative process and thoroughly checking the constructed categories against data.
The aim is not to discover the causes of phenomena and processes but to look for the connections and relationships between the data, codes, categories, or concepts, as in qualitative data analysis.
Finally, it is worth noting that, although abduction is not widely acknowledged as a species of scientific inference, the successful codification of some abductive methods has already been achieved.
41) that ‘It is their relevance to the research topic rather than their representativeness which determines the way in which the people to be studied are selected'.
(4) Modifiability: Is the theory readily modifiable as new data emerge?
If advertently or inadvertently the participants identify any individual supervisors or organisation, the researcher should immediately remind them that the researcher do not wish them to disclose such information.
But there are other considerations that arise from exploiting the technologies and techniques we have outlined that represent a potential downside or disadvantage for incorporating these digital interventions.
QDA methods are quite worthy, respectable and acceptable.
Navigating the virtual minefield: Using the Internet as a medium for conducting primary social research.
When describing the correspondence between the Activity types in EXIOBASE and YSTAFDB, we identified an instance of an activity type in YSTAFDB did not exactly correspond to an instance of an activity type in EXIOBASE.
In contrast, qualitative research had largely been taught through an oral tradition of mentoring and immersion in the field of inquiry.
Never suggest an answer or agree or disagree with an answer.
This step is done together with the research team.
[19] GT may or may not be mentioned in a QDA methodological discussion, but its procedures frequently are.
Deriving its theoretical underpinnings from the related movements of American pragmatism and symbolic interactionism, grounded theory inquiry is portrayed as a problem-solving endeavor concerned with understanding action from the perspective of the human agent.
Becoming insecure; Eric: I started to feel very insecure.
See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
In other words, it is possible to frame this process as a reflective process of interaction and transformation between experience (narratives, data) and theory (existing theories).
Coming from outside the IS domain, the Information Artefact Ontology (IAO, [7]) provides an ontological account of information content entities (ICE) such as document, databases and digital images.
Second, he/she must have the ability to develop theoretical insight into the area of research combined with the ability to make something of these insights.
However, for the researcher to adopt this attitude, they must see themselves in the collaborative approach and have the means to enable, promote, and facilitate collaboration.
Video and audio elements from the study provide evidence of the researcher's relationship/influence in the setting (i.e., non-intrusiveness, intimidation, etc).
For instance, in the IT field, there are infinitely many possible programs, with all kinds of variations.
838) briefly discussed the grounded theory researcher in these words...
Our specialist immediately took his guard up and said in the same tone that this was a university hospital and if they did not want this, they would not come here.
Provenance can be applied to the entire dataset as well as an individual datapoint.
It strengthens clinical trials by enhancing user involvement in it.
[10] The view of this paper is that the researcher who has to achieve a GT product to move on with his or her career and skill development is often blocked by the confusion created through this inappropriate mixing of methods and the attendant QDA requirements thus imposed.
I just felt that I must be messed up in my head, and that I was much more inferior to the others.
Ajjawi R, Higgs J (2007) Using hermeneutic phenomenology to investigate how experienced practitioners learn to communicate clinical reasoning.
The provisional, initial codes were carefully compared with each other and with data, further elaborated and grouped together based on similarities and differences, leading to fewer but more focused and comprehensive codes.
A system view on the artefact deemphasizes the role of the designer intention and focuses on understanding how the overall behavior derives or emerges from its parts.
Grounded theory methods of focused coding, theoretical coding, constant comparison, memo-writing and theoretical sampling guided Thornberg et al.
Each class in the BONSAI ontology is defined as a class by linking it to the class construct given in the OWL ontology; new predicates in BONSAI ontology are mainly defined as object properties.
The data is not to be discounted as "subjective," "obvious," "constructed," etc, as we find in QDA critiques.
In doing this, we have found that many existing technologies are underutilized because of an overly narrow conceptualization of what they do.
This makes theorising redundant in discovering knowledge about the regularities that govern society.
They do not agree with proposals that identify the program with the code.
[27] expressed scepticism about the work of Van Aken [1] and others who advocate a design research approach to management.
Digital qualitative methodologies not only introduce challenges in data management but also raise essential queries regarding the genuineness and reliability of data obtained through digital means.
Despite the lack of email and discussion forum features in this publication, the work still prompted three e-readers to seek out the author via email with questions and comments regarding the manuscript.
For this reason, it is important to take these aspects of research into consideration and use them appropriately (Cleland, 2015).
GT does not work that way, but the prevalence of QDA would have © 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
A database of RDF triples is called a triplestore, where RDF data can be stored, and data can be retrieved using semantic queries.
On this interpretation, grounded theory is depicted as a tabula rasa view of inquiry which indefensibly maintains that observations are not theory or concept dependent.
In Qualitative research in psychology: Expanding perspectives in methodology and design, ed.
She found herself face-to-face with homelessness, immense poverty, starvation, isolation, hopelessness, and death.
When QDA requires this preconception, GT is rendered non-emergent through coding and memoing as the researcher tries to follow a non-emergent problem.
Another way of presentation is to visualize the components, dimensions, patterns, weights, or interrelationships that emerge from the analysis (conceptual framework, model of the research, concept clouds, diagrams, etc.).
Provide options for archiving and long-term stewardship of data beyond the lifetime of the project and the researcher's career Options should be available to store data where access is controlled by the researcher, as well as options to archive materials or transfer them to a third-party data steward if appropriate.
Although once viewed as philosophically incongruent with experimental research, qualitative research is now recognized for its ability to add a new dimension to interventional studies that cannot be obtained through measurement of variables alone.[1] Qualitative research was initially used in psychological studies when researchers found it tedious to evaluate human behavior in numeric.
The intentional output corresponds to the attributed capacity, the physical output is the thing made.
If the text object is not unique but conforming to an artefact, then the latter is a symbolic artefact.
Never improvise, such as by adding answer categories, or make wording changes.
Finally, the 29 lower frequency areas (e.g., Victoria, Hamilton, Winnipeg, and Red Deer) accounted for the remaining 52.44% (n=236) of posts (an average of about 8 posts per area).
Greater visibility generates several benefits for educational researchers.
Professionals must maintain integrity and uphold stringent ethical standards.
So, it is important to conduct qualitative studies as reflective processes.
In accordance with grounded theory, they moved back
Figure 2: Use of Various Media to Portray a Phenomenon
An Introduction to Qualitative Research (1st ed.).
These changes resonate with our research initiatives' epistemological and ontological foundations.
Writing is a form event by which a technical (physical) object is created (the individual piece of paper, blank before the writing, and filled with signs after the writing).
For example, for spatiotemporal properties, we link to the Time ontology in OWL (Hobbes et al., 2020) and Schema ontology (Schema Community Group, 2011; Wick & Vatant, 2012), respectively, and for units of measure we linked our ontology to the OM ontology (Rijgersberg et al., 2013).
At every stage of the research process grounded theorists make comparisons beginning with data and ending with comparisons between their categories.1 1
A socio-technical system is a system that includes people.
Discerning the potential advantages and challenges of digitizing qualitative research and computer-assisted analytical practices is crucial.
Bullying by peers in childhood and effects on psychopathology, suicidality, and criminality in adulthood.
Measuring methodological reflexivity or intersubjective thinking presents a challenge and becomes more apparent in later data analysis stages than credibility.
[4] The mixing of QDA and GT methodologies has the effect of downgrading and eroding the GT goal of conceptual theory.
The analysis of the history of the dialogue could be commentary that enriches the scholarship and understanding of the phenomenon under study.
Instead, theoretical sorting forces the "nitty gritty" of making theoretically discrete discriminations as to where each idea fits in the emerging theory.
Examples of three qualitative studies are shared that incorporated the gathering, analysis, and integration of digital data.
There are, however, two rising issues that will have considerable impact for researchers.
They contended that rather than seeing grounded theory as a unitary method, we can view it as a useful nodal point around which we can debate significant issues in qualitative inquiry.
Embracing this change, researchers stand at the cusp of a revolution in how qualitative data is collected, analysed, and interpreted.
In the original but less developed one, Glaser and Strauss (1967) focused on cred ibility and applicability.
Never interpret the meaning of a question; just repeat the question and give instructions or clarifications that are provided in training or by supervisors.
?flow bont:hasObjectType / rdfs:label "Carbon dioxide, fossil" .
Using grounded theory now means more than openness to learning about the participants' lives.
Development of a decision tree to determine appropriateness of NVivo in analyzing qualitative data sets.
In the field of Information Systems, the manager can introduce new IT, and new methods (structuring the business processes), and in that way enhance the Information System in the broader sense.
He is also engaged in research on student teachers' experiences of distressed situation during teacher training, and research on values education in everyday school life.
Types of article published in physiotherapy journals: A quantitative analysis.
Some work has been done on a typology of IS artefacts, but surprisingly little.
But no one holds to such a naive inductivist position.
I have addressed these problems at length in "The Grounded Theory Perspective: Conceptualization Contrasted with Description" (GLASER, 2001).
Introduction Studies that incorporate grounded theory approach are basically a step towards conceptual thinking and theory building rather than empirical testing of the theory.
Lincoln, (Eds.), Qualitative Research (3rd ed., pp.
Qualitative studies should be well‐designed and the aims, procedures of the study should be meticulously adjudicated.
Finally, with the integration of cutting-edge technologies like virtual reality, augmented reality, and machine learning, the boundaries of what qualifies as "qualitative research" are being continually redefined.
Data, by contrast, are idiosyncratic to particular investigative contexts.
means making what the researchers learn transparent by showing how the research has been conducted thoroughly and systematically.
[52] 3.8 Constant comparative method The constant comparative method enables the generation of theory through systematic and explicit coding and analytic procedures.
Digital platforms have made real-time, global collaboration feasible.
This is curious, given that pragmatists like Dewey held philosophy to be like science, only more general.
This text object can become the subject of design (of a text writer, addressing the construction workers), meeting user requirements of being easy to read, complete etc., and so becomes an artefact itself.
The role of pride in women with anorexia nervosa: A grounded theory study.
Introduction The difference between the particularistic, routine, normative data we all garner in our everyday lives and scientific data is that the latter is produced by a methodology.
Still, it remains realist because it addresses human realities and assumes the existence of real worlds...the constructivist approach assumes what we take as real, as objective knowledge and truth, is based upon our perspective...thus the grounded theorist constructs an image of reality, not the reality - that is, objective, true, and external'.
Provenance refers to adding information on data origin.
It just goes on and on-empirical tiny topics draining both researcher and audience.
Therefore, each has its own strengths and weaknesses.
Therefore, an ontology is a form of model that represents the key concepts of a domain and the relationships among them.
[35] provided a detailed ontological analysis of software.
Researchers must weigh their ethical responsibilities and potential risks to participants against the potential benefits of other researchers having access to the data in the future.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 818 (1), 145-161.
There is no absolute measure for the level of detail required.
The second level of delimiting the theory is a reduction in the original list of categories for coding.
The ontology was developed using languages published
Critical Criminology: An International Journal, 9(1-2), 85-100.
(2018) Centre for Critical Qualitative Health Research - Learning and teaching qualitative health research in Ontario: A resource guide.
Researchers conducting inquiry with some populations, such as children and youth, may decide that it is too great a risk to ask individuals to consent to an undetermined future use of their data, particularly if these individuals might be identified.
?yActivity bont:hasActivityType / rdfs:label "Agricultural production;food processing" .
According to [28], characteristic for design research is the situated implementation of an invention (artefact) as software or system.
Grounded theory method: Philosophical perspectives, paradigm of inquiry, and postmodernism.
272-273) defined it in more detail and tried to differentiate between the true and real in grounded theory perspective...
Decisions about themes and relevance to theory development still need to be addressed.
It should be sufficient for distinguishing the artefact from siblings (for instance, to distinguish the Diesel engine from the combustion engine).
Social Research Methods: Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches.
To begin with, the ontology schema by Janowicz et al.
This ability provides an element of openness that was impossible to achieve before digital text files could be incorporated.
The collaborative process offers, in particular, the possibility of interacting effectively and allows the development of analysis, synthesis, problem-solving, and evaluation skills.
Moreover, the possibility of interoperability and linking data across and beyond use in industrial ecology models can be achieved using the LOD platform.
Look for unstated assumptions and examine your own as well as those of your research participants.
A comprehensive description of checklists and guide lines for evaluation of the two later criteria is offered by Strauss and Corbin (1990; Corbin and Strauss 1990; Strauss and Corbin 1998).
Here, there is an effort to understand, interpret and make sense together through different contexts, approaches, and theoretical foundations.
(4) Control: The theory should help the users to understand and analyze their social reality, to include enough explanatory power on what is going on in situations and how to bring about change in them.
MORSE's reference to saturation does not imply conceptual saturation; rather, it anticipates simple redundancy without conceptual analysis.
This study demonstrates that there are powerful ways for qualitative researchers to integrate hyperlinked environments to produce final research products that strengthen and enhance the field.
Within an activity, agents can perform different roles, for example, laborer, owner, purchaser, consumer
In that case, collaboration needs institutional support and flexibility, straightforward working procedures, and social relations, promoting open research debate without threatening the researcher's identity.
Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative analysis.
As one applies substantive theory elsewhere or generates formal theory, context-when relevant -will emerge.
Ceusters, W., Smith, B.: Aboutness: Towards Foundations for the Information Artifact Ontology.
Nowadays, its composition is described in terms of objects or services.
At the same time, we recommend you learn more about issues of rigor, credibility and quality emphasized in the methodological discourse of the specific version of grounded theory that you choose to use.
The young couple walked out of the doctor's office, now nervous and embarrassed.
And while such sites are potential gold mines for their research potential, for researchers concerned about their participants' confidentiality, this trend is fraught with danger because of the loss of control it involves; essentially it places the researcher and his or her data at the whim of another party's privacy and use policies, very few of which are created with the rights and interests of researchers and research participants in mind.
Conversely, the same content could have been covered face-to-face in a quarter of the time.
reside is involved in monitoring computer traffic, as these practices and their potential consequences to participants vary widely.
Digital methods help us to study social change and cultural conditions using various online data leveraging technologies to gain deeper insights into societal trends and patterns.
Implications Digital data, connected seamlessly into qualitative research reports, have potential for strengthening the genre of portraiture.
Three notable benefits are analytical credibility, methodological reflexivity, and intersubjective thinking.
Qualitative Research in Counselling and Psychotherapy.
Introduction to Social Research: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches (1st ed.).
In this case, participants who have not consented to the use of their data beyond the original project could risk being identified in the data provided by other participants, and researchers must decide whether they can share any of the data from the project without compromising each individual participants' confidentiality and right to refuse to have their data shared for future re-use.
The first is the hardware and software required to engage in the various practices we have described.
All content following this page was uploaded by Hans Weigand on 01 May 2025.
Journal of Industrial Ecology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Yale University.
EXIOBASE: 272 (200 products and 72 emission types) YSTAFDB: 670
This is one of the identifying dimensions of a datapoint.
It is critical to consult expert opinion at this point.
It can be used to classify IT artefacts on the basis of their use.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press
The benefits of mastering digital technology are evident in the diverse applications and advantages of tools like CAQDAS.
However, the level of abstraction is usually not as high as e.g.
Yet critics appear to ignore other important considerations about the contributions of psychologists who conduct qualitative research.
‘The world view within which you are conducting research plays a defining role in how you prepared for the interview, who you choose an interviewee, what questions you ask, how you structure the interview, and how you interpret the data'.
The demographic that appeared to be most receptive to this emergent form of communication was the younger generation of Internet users, many of whom were born only a few years before the introduction of the first GUI web browser.
Big data, advanced statistical tools, digital platforms, and, notably, CAQDAS (Computer Assisted Qualitative Data Analysis Software) have broadened the scope of research possibilities.
At this point, qualitative studies come to the fore and this increases the need for practical guides and models for qualitative studies.
?a a bont:Activity; bont:hasDeterminingFlow ?f; bont:hasLocation ?l; bont:hasTemporalExtent btime:2011; bont:hasActivityType / rdfs:label "Copper products" .
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=uqrp20
I hope to relieve GT of the excessive scientism brought on it by those worried about accuracy and what is "real" data when creating a scientific product.
In an increasingly digitised world, where almost every facet of daily life intersects with technology, mastering the tools of CAQDAS and digital methods becomes imperative for qualitative researchers.
He was fidgeting all the time and shaking his head from right to left as if to say how come.
Methodology is concerned with process and method through which the researcher acquires knowledge about the world (Creswell, 2007; Edwards & Skinners, 2009; Punch, 1998, 2013).
Ontology developers in the life sciences have adopted the application ontology approach (Kamdar et al., 2019; Yeumo et al., 2017).
However, few researchers engaged in theoretical sampling and saturation and constructed theory.
15309290, 2022, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jiec.13220 by Cochrane Uruguay, Wiley Online Library on [18/06/2025].
Contextuality It is important to consider all processes related to education, including qualitative studies, from educational change to curriculum development, learning, assessment, and evaluation processes, within the framework of the ‘complex social system' approach with its own complexity and contextuality (Gülpınar, 2021; Gülpınar, 2024; Bleakley & Cleland, 2015).
Meijers (Ed.), Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences, pp.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)
These possibilities should encourage us to explore and pursue the integration of digital data in our inquiries.
To verify this reliability, we use the inter-coder agreement procedure.
This provides a practical guide to contextual and reflective data analysis, interpretation, and reporting for the use of those conducting qualitative studies.
We discuss the opportunities and challenges associated with integrating, querying, and computing data from different sources within the Semantic Web.
All economic activities can be defined as ActivityTypes; labor costs, net taxes, net operating surplus (FlowObjects) can be defined as input or output Flows; population (such as households, individuals, persons, legal persons) can be defined as Agents.
Examples are domain models that aim to analyze the behavior, for instance, systemdynamics simulations.
In: Winter R et al (eds) Global perspectives on design science research, Springer, pp.77-92.
Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
It is completely variable and has conceptual carry through in the emerging theory, enabling the analyst to get through the analyses of the processes that he/she is working on by its relevance and explanatory power.
This is clear from their claim that "the strategy of comparative analysis for generating theory puts a high emphasis on theory as process; that is, theory as an ever-developing entity, not as a perfected product."12 In this regard, Glaser and Strauss advise the researcher to be constantly on the lookout for new perspectives that might help them develop their grounded theory, although they do not explore the point in detail.
They help to aggregate, manipulate, and manage structured and unstructured data.
Theoretical codes conceptualize how the substantive codes may relate to each other as hypotheses to be integrated into the theory.
Furthermore, Crichton (2012) posited that digital tools not only streamline the tasks of qualitative researchers but also enrich the data, offering more significant depth.
We are all stuck with a "human" view of what is going on and hazy concepts and descriptions about it.
Also, by including all the constraints in the problem's articulation, the problem enables the researcher to direct inquiry effectively by pointing the way to its own solution.
This training and information should be respectful of disciplinary differences and should accommodate the needs and commitments of qualitative researchers to their participants and research sites.
Datafication, Digital Humanities, and New Analytical Approaches The digital era brings datafication (Flensburg and Lomborg 2023), permeating the very fabric of qualitative research.
Although the focus of this paper is on IS artefacts, we start with a short summary of our general ontology of artefacts (in progress) which builds on and extends the work of Borgo [5] as well as Lawson [21] and Kroes [20].
Moreover, considering modern qualitative research, we must consider the digital possibilities opening up as these platforms and tools redefine how we interact and convey information because of the virtual revolution of portable computing power brought about by the different mobile devices like smartphones, tablets, and wearables, and also by the digital possibilities generated by business trendsetters such as Apple, Facebook, or Google, and their respective apps which have millions to billions of users, making them significant data sources.
Of course, the audio and video quality of the media is important, but the story to be told should be the priority.
Instead, data, digital methods, and advanced algorithms, especially from Natural Language Processing (NLP), have become paramount sources of cognition.
Digital research infrastructure for qualitative researchers: Background and context The advancement of open science initiatives and corresponding investments in data repositories has proceeded rapidly within such fields as the physical sciences and survey-based, quantitative social sciences (McKiernan et al., 2916).
Although it has been developed and principally used within the field of sociology, grounded theory can be, and has been, successfully employed by people in a variety of different disciplines.
In Canada, no statute-based protections of any sort are available to researchers at this time other than those at Statistics Canada (via the Statistics Act), which means that those who do research involving sensitive information from identifiable sources that would be of interest to a powerful third party must be doubly careful, although such challenges occur much less frequently than in the United States (Lowman & Palys, 2001).
‘Find meaning in an action, or to say one understands what a particular action means, requiring that one interprets in a particular way what the actions are doing'.
The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research.
Before outlining quality in grounded theory research, we wish to point out that many researchers, psychologists among them, use this method for a variety of worthy purposes instead of or in conjunction with theory con struction.
Qualitative studies are research studies designed within a different paradigm with a different understanding of reality and knowledge, different research designs, research methods, and tools.
If the content in the narratives of the two to three contexts is dense and sufficient, layered reading may be preferred.
In the near future, we expect these kind of analysis/design models to play a role in autonomous intelligent systems (robots).
Our claim is that software program and IS application are the core domain artefact types in Computer Science and Information Systems.
and Canadian researchers may not be able to deposit and store sensitive data on U.S.
From primary healthcare to education and governance processes, it is important to address all health-related experiences in their integrity, complexity, and context, with their behavioural, social, and humane dimensions.
Theoretical sensitivity: Advances in the methodology of grounded theory (Vol.
However, the respondents described qualitative research as providing the ‘best methods for feminist, community-based, and social justice research' (p.
Faculty of Medicine, Eastern Mediterranean University, Famagusta, Turkey
It is just that-no more-and it is readily modifiable as new data come from whatever source-literature, new data, collegial comments, etc.
The future of grounded theory.Qualitative Health Research, 9(6), 836-845.
The software suite includes functionalities ranging from coding, memoing, and paraphrasing to annotating, grouping, and network-building.
4.3 Role of the Researcher The researcher plays a role of ‘lens' through which data are gathered and interpreted.
The qualitative research process can be conducted digitally and collaboratively on the web (server or cloud computing) or desktop software: interview transcribing, project and task managing, codebook preparing and coding, data analysis and modelling, interpretation and theorising, and final writing and representing findings.
The digitisation that permeates our daily lives further blurs the distinctions between commercial software programs.
Understanding cybersecurity fundamentals is paramount, given the increasing cyber threats in our digital-centric world.
Other memos are more analytic because grounded theorists take codes apart.
Therefore, in the qualitative research process, it is important to consider the limitations of qualitative research as well as the differences between qualitative and quantitative research.
Our outpatient clinics were behind locked doors and designed to let in only the patients whose turn it was.
So some systems are artefact instances, while others, for instance, a family, are not.
in terms of design models, like an UML object model.
Even one doctor was too much for them, and there were 9 of us, but our specialist didn't seem to notice any of them.
With the advent of these modern information and communication technologies, a fresh era is unfolding-one marked by unprecedented interconnectedness, presenting researchers with diverse and previously unthought-of opportunities.
This is because the creation of a theory is thought to be a psychological (historical, sociological, etc.) event only, whereas science as a rational enterprise is properly concerned with testing, because that is considered to be a logical affair.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)
During her fieldwork in Brazil, Elizabeth Hordge-Freeman (in Charmaz 2020, pp.
Throughout our discussion, we detail how concerns about quality pervade the research process in grounded theory studies.
GSU Dept of CIS Working Paper, Atlanta: Georgia State University.
Third, the work associated with preparing qualitative data for storage and future use creates additional burden and demands for researchers and participants, for which there is currently little, if any, support (e.g., time, training, compensation).
It also should be noted that there are a wealth of open-source shareware and freeware software solutions available to those with the desire to implement technology into the research process, but who do not have the financial resources to invest immediately.
Particularly it is conceptual thinking and theory building that's why the researchers usually are going to conduct an inductive, constructivist ‘Grounded Theory' approach.
Blom, S., Schönherr, M., Bub, U.: Artefact types in information system design science - a literature review.
This shift has changed how we perceive and approach the gathering and analysis of data.
The second framing is done by using the theories and models available in the literature concerning the situation or phenomenon that is the subject of the qualitative study.
The researchers did not mention any specific time duration for interviews but can be last for 60 to 90 minutes however, these questions and times are merely a guide and estimation for the interview sessions; the interview time and duration depends upon the participant's responses which can extend and prolong the interviews sessions.
QDA researchers have never figured out the exact purpose and techniques of selective coding.
Portraiture in HyperText with CD-ROM Extending the hypertext environment to include additional media elements is modeled in the author's dissertation study.
and forth between gathering and analyzing data (iterative process).
Besides classes, new predicates defined in the BONSAI ontology were also linked to the OWL ontology to better define their functions.
Abstract Although the many sites and opportunities available to researchers through the development and proliferation of the Internet are well known, little attention has been paid to what digital technologies and the world's developing digital infrastructure can offer qualitative researchers for the actual process of doing research.
Therefore, the interviewer's approach and way of asking questions, listening and following up what the interviewee is telling are crucial in the coconstruction and quality of data.
GT becomes considered, wrongly, as an interpretative method, a symbolic interaction method, a constructionist method, a qualitative method, a describing method, a producer of worrisome facts, a memoing method, an interview or field method and so forth.
What we see as problematic here is that the artefact is identified with (design) research outcome.
Example: Query on EXIOBASE Cultivation of wheat in Denmark PREFIX <Specify namespace of ontology used.
In the research, thick descriptions and reflections are written about who and what was done, the context in which the research was conducted, and the individual/team contexts of the researchers (Rudd & D'Andrea, 2015).
Worrisome accuracy of qualitative data description continually concerns qualitative researchers and their audiences.
It is not underlined by symbolic interaction, nor constructed data.
Providing the audience with these resources creates a setting for increased engagement, translating to greater visibility of research questions and assertions.
The endpoint was developed using yasgui query interface (TriplyDB, 2020).
Double victimizing: an example of developing a new concept with grounded theory
Usefulness includes clarifying research participants' understanding of their everyday lives, forming a foundation for policy and practice applications, contributing to creating new lines of research, as well as revealing pervasive
However, preceding studies that developed ontologies in the field of sustainability assessment did not present practical solutions with respect to the development and use of the ontologies to integrate data with the Semantic Web and LOD to enhance data interpretation and interoperability.
Credibility is a synthetic outcome of the primary analytical process stages, including data coding, investigating the code's relationships, developing interpretations, and qualitative theorizing.
Little increments of coding, analyzing and collecting data cook and mature and then blossom later into theoretical memos.
The researcher may need additional technical support in locating and operating the equipment required.
This is the appropriate mode for representing the bulk of our causal mechanisms which are drawn from the domain of possible experience.
Methodological Caveats We have focussed on opportunities first, and hope they have opened readers' eyes to some possibilities that digital technologies can generate in their research.
Nor is it true that, if only one is patient enough, insight wondrously enlightens the researcher.
4.2 Characteristics of Qualitative Research According to Burns and Grove (2009), qualitative research is a systematic and subjective approach to highlight and explain daily life experiences and to further give them proper meaning.
As, earlier mentioned that the researchers while conducting a ‘grounded theory' approach and for the first round, they can distribute structured questionnaires to have employee's perception of the phenomenon of interest in an organization.
L., Briggs, E., Riggs, P., & Palmanteer-Holder, N.
Objects of interest (goods, substances, commodities, materials, products, waste, environmental flows)
Seven of my friends and I entered the outpatient clinic door at 9.30 in the morning.
EXIOBASE supports analysis techniques 1 https://ontology.bonsai.uno/
Guidelines currently exist for researchers to determine the sensitivity of their data and strategies for de-identifying and storing sensitive data; these guidelines and training should be provided to researchers with specific emphasis on qualitative data.
It starts with an ontological characterization of artefacts and technical objects in general and proceeds to introduce a systematic classification of IS artefacts and compare it with existing work.
Regarding the qualitative research sampling he cited in his book (Flick, 1998, p.
This is especially useful when user requirements are qualitative (Sobhkhiz et al., 2021).
PHENOMENA DETECTION Although hypothetico-deductivism and grounded theory offer different accounts of inquiry, they share the view that scientific theories explain and predict facts about observed data.
The query results in a binary response of True or False if the FlowObject is an input or not for a specific activity
Data Presentation Careful consideration must be given to the final format(s) a research report will take.
Media and textual elements were combined to give readers a more descriptive experience of the case studies.
Intriguingly, this shift aligns with the core principles of grounded theory.
Due to the nature of this fieldwork flow, CAQDAS and other digital solutions facilitate a seamless transition through the various stages-from the subtleties of the transcription process to the complexities of data analysis to the formulation of theory.
Because of the digital form of the data (pdf files), students could be given almost 400 pages of text as a small, email attachment.
Generating a theory from data means that most hypotheses and concepts not only come from the data, but are systematically worked out in relation to the data during the course of the research.
Derek Layder, New Strategies in Social Research (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1993), selectively incorporates ideas from grounded theory and Mertonian theory testing into a broadly realist methodology for social science research.
When an IS application is assembled together with a machine or robot into a cyberphysical system, a new category of artefacts arises.
http://www.ed.uiuc.edu/EPS/PES-Yearbook/95_docs/haig.html (9 of 11)8/4/2006 9:04:24 AM
If a model or framework could not be drawn at the design stage, it emerges during the analysis and interpretation of qualitative data.
In other words, I started to Self-doubting; Loss of self-confidence; Thinking doubt myself more and more.
For the purposes of testing the BONSAI ontology, information that are not strictly relevant for LCSA, for example, information on criticality and recyclability of materials from YSTAFDB, was not currently extracted.
In this study, theoretical sampling was necessary to reach theore tical saturation in terms of having constructed a grounded theory with theo retical completeness (Charmaz 2014; Glaser, 2001).
Capturing and transferring the audio or video taped version of the interview (or observation) and making these elements available to the reader provides a more distinct presentation of the experience.
However, assembling a quality DVD research portraiture is not an easy task.
Examples of BalanceableProperty are dry mass, wet mass, energy, elemental mass.
In this regard, two primary areas of concern can be identified.
Provide options for researcher-controlled and third-party stewardship Researchers should have the option to control access to data in repositories (e.g., requests to access data are reviewed and granted by the researcher), and there should also be options for researchers to stipulate conditions of access and security for data to be controlled by a qualified third party (e.g., requests to access data are reviewed and granted by a third party/data steward organization).
[38] These above authors are typical of many trying to place GT somewhere in the QDA camp.
The origins of data analysis software and the integration of computers in social sciences are rooted
According to [4:693], ‘the models developed in the engineering sciences should be distinguished from the models produced in engineering [in technological practice].
At this point, we returned to the theories determined during the design of the research, on which the research topic was based.
Notably, the widespread accessibility of the Internet holds the promise of strengthening democracy, championing cultural diversity, and safeguarding fundamental human rights, such as the freedom of expression and access to information and connectivity.
An interpretivist view of the world is subjective, where individuals form their own reality of the world in different contexts through interactions with others.
Professionals must be attuned to subtle vocal nuances, pauses, and inflexions without physical cues.
Interviews: learning the craft of qualitative research inter viewing.
Giving the audience access to the context (e.g., complete transcriptions) allows for further examination and interpretation of the data.
These are methodological notions that should be congenial to grounded theorists.
Furthermore, it is worth noting the democratizing influence of these digital tools on the research landscape.
Such access provides an avenue for researchers to more openly share their discoveries and for consumers of the research to participate in the process of data analysis, if they choose.
The data are supposed to speak for themselves, free from theoretical limitations or researchers' assumptions.
○ Range: The classes whose instances constitute the set of resources that participate as objects in a given property.
New data may revise and elaborate the theory further.
between different versions of grounded theory have to be considered when evaluating quality and discussing quality criteria for grounded theory (for overviews of similarities and differences between Glaserian, Straussian and constructivist grounded theory approaches, see Berthelsen, Grimshaw-Aagaard, and Hansen 2018; Thornberg 2017; for further discussions about the link between episte mology and quality criteria, see for example; Healy and Perry 2000; Lincoln, Lynham, and Guba 2018; Lützhöft, Nyce, and Petersen 2010; SantiagoDeleofosse et al.
First the theory solidifies, in the sense that major modifications become fewer and fewer as the analyst compares the next incidents of a category to its properties.
Frustrations and concerns about implementing these practices are discussed.
From the ontological perspective, the sorting algorithm, in one of its variants, e.g.
This contrasting with other theories also prevents modifying the GT generated theory using the other theory as a kind of data.
In the following, we will keep using the terms IT and IS artefact.
For EXIOBASE, the terms ":products," "resources," and "emissions" were annotated as FlowObjects; whilst "economic activities" including consumption at final demand was annotated as ActivityTypes.
5-6)further mentioned in his book rather cited the (Glaser, 1978; Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Strauss, 1987) defining components of grounded theory practice in these words as...
Abstract: This paper outlines my concerns with Qualitative Data Analysis' (QDA) numerous re-
It was quite small and consisted of 4 rooms with no windows.
Synthesis lectures on engineers, technology and society 6(1), San Rafael: Morgan & Claypool Publishers.
Just like using a manual means that the manual is executed step by step, so the use of the algorithm means that the make plan/algorithm code is executed.
"Doing qualitative research is not a passive endeavor.
Professionals should be versed in best practices related to data encryption, secure data storage, and safe data transmission.
Using the Prov-O ontology was useful to annotate the elaborate metadata particularly provided in YSTAFDB that includes source for each datapoint.
The widespread digital integration between traditional and new approaches has reshaped how we understand and interpret information.
The following paragraphs describe how developers of portraiture might use digital resources to strengthen and deepen their work, utilizing these resources.
International Journal of Research & Method in Education 32 (1):25-38.
The ethics and law of confidentiality in criminal justice research: A comparison of Canada and the United States.
Like his wife, he prepared as if he wanted to say something, but he said nothing.
Reflections about images, visual culture, and educational research.
Creswell JW (2012) Educational Research; Planning, Conducting, and Evaluating Quantitative and Qualitative Research.
Step 4 - organizing/creating the conceptual, theoretical framework.
It is a platform that harmoniously integrates both old and new research methods.
Alongside this, technological know-how is a crucial aspect of digital literacy.
These paradigms are further based on three perspectives.
Contextual, reflective, and narrative model In this model, developed through a triple approach, the ‘qualitative data analysis and interpretation process' and the ‘reporting process' are addressed separately and two concrete frameworks are developed.
Qualitative inquiry explains social phenomena using high quality, rich information, to address how and why individuals and social groups understand, feel and interact in specific contexts (Facey et al., 2018).
The members of a class are known as instances of the class.
Why have you chosen the specific topic, methodology and methods, and how do these fit with who you are and your research objectives and questions?
Symbolic interaction purports that meaning is socially constructed, negotiated and changes over time.
E-readers respond to these representations with interest and insights into the complexities of the research enterprise.
He would later tell us the patient's history and which tests he wanted and for what purpose.
In these guidelines, simply delete the ‘never and don'ts' and you would get the essence of interviewing in the interpretivist world.
The general goal of grounded theory research is to construct theories in order to understand phenomena.
The association for the study of medical education.
?act bont:hasActivityType / rdfs:label "Cattle farming".
Only appropriate and proper development of the sampling technique will lead to the authenticity of the results.
Since the approaches are new and offer a different reading, analysis, and interpretation framework, and therefore the general reader may not be very familiar with them, there may be extra challenges in
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press
He did not know what a varicocele examination was, but he understood the general concept.
Similarly, the class of Activities are broadly defined, encompassing both natural and human-controlled activities, including production, consumption, and trade activities, as well as stock change activities (stock additions and stock removals).
LOD represents the next step, where data on the Web is connected among different data sources (Ghali & Frayret, 2019).
Therefore, a clear understanding of these regulations is not just a legal ne-
For example, one community member posted a message back to the community that stated, I looked at the names of some of the people associated with the project (ain't Google wonderful!) and they have a number of legitimate research studies and analyses out there.
We can go one step further and consider the purpose of the model.
Glaser and Strauss's (1967) book inspired generations of graduate students.
A precise characterization of the artefact concept and the exploration of all meaningful artefacts in the IS domain is the subject of this paper.
In the particular DVD cited here, excerpts exist where classroom noises nearly overpower the interviewee's response or where the classroom lighting is not optimal for video taping.
Glaser's work with Strauss in his book, "An Awareness of Dying", for example, unlocked much of the meaning of what was "going on" in a Japanese hospital during the time when my father-in-law was on the trajectory of terminal cancer.
CRESWELL may be stating a fundamental tenant of GT-begin with no preconceived theory and then generate one during the analysis (unless he meant applying an extant theory).
A sense of not fitting in as a result of being Eric: Yeah, that was what I was told all the time, that I was bullied; Inferring social deviance of self from a nerd, I wore ugly clothes and stuff like that.
The pre-study literature review of QDA is a waste of time and a derailing of relevance for the GT Study.
(2016) developed a general classification to structure data for assessing socioeconomic models commonly used in industrial ecology.
The applicability of the ontology to the datasets is based on its ability to extract the required information.
‘Initial sampling in grounded theory is where you start, whereas theoretical sampling directs you where to go' (Charmaz, 2006, p.
As I have said above, the choice of methodology to render research representations about qualitative data as scientific is the researcher's choice.
The reality is perceived as subjective and depends how researchers and participants perceive it (Creswell, 2007; Punch, 1998).
information system) practice for practical purposes but also in the research practice (the scientific community) for the purpose of building up knowledge.
Silver, M., Markus, L.: Conceptualizing the SocioTechnical (ST) Artifact.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 20, 1-10.
When rigor is required for the design, the specification must be explicit in the form of a text object.
The criteria-of theoretical purpose and relevance-are applied in the ongoing joint collection and analysis of data associated with the generation of theory.
Furthermore, we emphasise that technological advancements enable researchers to engage in real-time sharing and collaboration on the same project, regardless of geographical boundaries.
It is important that this process is handled in a reflective continuum of deepening reading, focusing, meaning-making, and interpretation rather than a repetitive mechanical process (Srivastava & Hopwood, 2009).
The students' quest for higher education contradicted cultural norms for women.
Reflections of the researcher, the person analysing
In [8], a distinction is made between the information artefact (a material entity) and the information carrier, now called information quality entity.
Rather, individuals can be contacted, using a snow-ball sampling technique, through the researcher's personal contacts and social networks.
An instructive treatment of models, which stresses their central role in scientifc theory construction is Rom Harré, "The Constructive Role of Models," in The Use of Models in the Social Sciences, ed.
Criteria for evaluating quality in grounded theory can vary due to which version of grounded theory is of concern.
For instance, we can start with a mathematical Python library used in developing a Python
However, it is surprising to note that while Strauss mentions Peirce's idea of abduction in his brief discussion of induction, he refrains from linking it to his discussion of the inductive discovery of theory.9 Whatever Glaser and Strauss's view of the matter, I think it is important to follow Peirce's lead and characterize the creative inference involved in the generation of theory as abductive in nature.10 A typical characterization of abductive inference can be given as follows: some observations (phenomena) are encountered which are surprising because they do not follow from any accepted hypothesis; we come to notice that those observations (phenomena) would follow as a matter of course from the truth of a new hypothesis in conjunction with accepted auxiliary claims; we therefore conclude that the new hypothesis is plausible and thus deserves to be seriously entertained and further investigated.
Specifies a FlowObject that functions as the ReferenceUnit for a BalanceableProperty measure
In some sense, the artefact is a bridge between the make context and the use context.
It is fair to say that the scientific rigor of the current DSR models is often lower than in the exact sciences with their long mathematical tradition.
Digital Publishing Granting the consumers of qualitative research multiple ways of reviewing the data and the research methodologies has the potential of strengthening the trustworthiness of the research, as well as making Journal of the Research Center for Educational Technology (RCET) Vol.
Communication systems including the World Wide Web, electronic databases, and digital multimedia repositories are making it possible for educational researchers to share their work in multiple venues and formats.
When GT becomes laced with QDA requirements, it is hard to follow to the point of confusion.
Consequently, researchers seek more potent and secure data-handling solutions.
Throughout the seven-step process, interpretation processes begin and evolve along with contextual and reflective analysis.
The ontology as proposed can thus be used to annotate data from socioeconomic datasets into the Semantic Web.
The studies' methodologies and practices are scrutinized, focusing on how these inquiries were expanded and enhanced with digital data.
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
In grounded theory studies, the researcher's analytic focus emerges during the research process, rather than being determined before empirical inquiry begins.
researcher or engaged in qualitative research to reap the benefits.
Building on our general ontology of artefacts (in progress), the goal of this conceptual paper is to introduce an ontology of IS artefacts and analyze the practical implications for Design Science Research.
Ultimately, using constructivist grounded theory, I redirected my questions to be able to collect data that provided me a greater understanding of how structural and affective constraints shape filhas de criação lives and used reflex ivity to ensure that my interviewees' interpretations were taken seriously.
Yet another more promising option with which we have only begun to experiment is the batch conversion of digital recordings into a single voice file for the purposes of automated transcription.
A text object such as the blue book on my desk is a technical object where the attributed capacity (the written content) can be recaptured in the use (the reading).
Tools such as NVivo, Atlas.ti, webQDA, and MAXQDA under the CAQDAS umbrella have revolutionised qualitative research.
So, I really got very bad self-confidence from all the bullying.
The addition of these transcriptions gives the reader access to raw data, and judgments about coding, themes and interpretations can be made.
As well, some have been involved in harm reduction strategies with the sex worker community and some have expertise in criminal justice issues.
These perspectives are epistemology, ontology and methodology (Denzin & Lincoln, 2003; Punch, 2013).
Datafication-the constantly increasing amount of data in daily life and the improvement of analytical techniques (new algorithms, new functionalities, more efficient software)-represents a paradigm shift in our analytical mindset (Dijck 2014).
Instances of non-balanceable of an Activity description or a database of such activities.
Analytic rules detail operations, specify foci, delimit and select use of the data and concepts, act as reminders of what to do and keep track of and provide the necessary discipline for sticking to and keeping track of the central theme as the total theory is generated.
The process of analysis begins with line-by-line analysis to identify first level codes.
He explained it through an example that the concept of aggression can be applied to several units: an individual, group, organization, or country.
The normal messiness of qualitative work will be increased during this process, and the focus must be kept on the story, not on the technology.
However, in my view the various attacks on realism have in fact contributed to its development in a more viable form.16 Constructivist excesses aside, findings from contemporary science studies tend to support the idea that scientific realism is the working scientist's "natural attitude." AEI method provides a framework for inquiry that takes advantage of realist philosophical work on research problems, generative methodology, and coherence justification.
Johannesson, P.,Perjons, E.: An Introduction to Design Science.
Introduction: The Discipline and Practice of Qualitative Research.
11; 2014 ISSN 1833-3850 E-ISSN 1833-8119 Published by Canadian Center of Science and Education
In the case of interviews, this traditionally has meant transcribing, which has often been described as the most labour-intensive part of the process, with one interview hour normally taking anywhere from 4 to 6 hours or more to transcribe.
Although mindful of grounded theory's pragmatist origins, this paper has outlined a philosophical reconstruction of grounded theory method in accord with a broadly realist conception of methodology.
Similarly, although the ontology has a class for Agent, datasets for ABM often have additional information on behavioral parameters.
What do we mean by digital research infrastructure?
In this section we discuss the challenges and potential solutions for semantic processing.
Qualitative research can have a major contribution in health research.
The reading of the text for changing the mental state of the listeners is a special but of course very important use (Fig.
Consumers of the research often question the trustworthiness of the data presented, relying heavily on the researcher's expertise in defining themes and identifying the most salient examples on which to draw conclusions.
Instead, they argued that qualitative research must be evaluated on its own canons, not on those imposed by the dominant quantitative tradition.
Rubin, Bell, and McCleland (2018) document the above concerns in their mixed methods study of graduate psychology programs.
SELECT (xsd:string(?z) as ?isRequired) FROM <Specify IRI of dataset, See query 1> WHERE { bind (exists { ?xFlow bont:isInputOf ?yActivity; ˆbont:hasDeterminingFlow ?yActivity; bont:hasObjectType ?xObject .
This is a very weak gradation for discerning the difference among QDA methods and GT methodology.
According to the results of the analysis, if it is seen that the existing framework is working, the necessary modifications are made.
Paper presented at the 53rd Conference of the American Association for Public Opinion Research, St.
This interconnectedness fosters a more holistic and multidisciplinary approach to research, where varied perspectives converge to produce more prosperous outcomes.
While desktop solutions remain available, the burgeoning phenomenon of datafication and associated computational demands deem traditional data storage and analysis methods progressively unreliable.
The intended effect of using the text object (in the case of human reading) is typically a change in the mental state of the human agent corresponding to the attributed capacity (the text meaning).
Grown up digital: How the net generation is changing your world.
Creating digital research infrastructure can, however, be useful to support researchers in documenting their research process.
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
National Institute of Medical Statistics (Indian Council of Medical Research).
[42] 3.1 Theoretical sensitivity The ability to generate concepts from data and to relate them according to normal models of theory in general, and theory development in sociology in particular, is the essence of theoretical sensitivity.
For the definition of physical object we follow the UFO definition of a substance individual, that is ‘an endurant that consists of matter (i.e., is "tangible" or concrete), possesses spatio-temporal properties, and can exist by itself; that is, it does not existentially depend on other endurants, except possibly on some of its parts)' [15].
In conclusion, as the digital landscape continues to evolve, researchers must balance leveraging advanced digital and collaborative tools and maintaining rigorous data protection, consistently placing the ethical treatment of participant data at the forefront of their practices.
The study involved three main phases: (i) design and development of the ontology that defines the core concepts of LCSA.
The GT researcher listens to participants venting issues rather than encouraging them to talk about a subject of little interest.
The digital transformation has reshaped the dynamics of scientific work, drawing it closer in nature to conventional business projects.
These first versions of what was then an esoteric program called SPSS were themselves leagues ahead of the rooms full of mechanical calculators that he had been trained on as an undergraduate, and were at that time considered the province of the adventurous.
Furthermore, the quality of quantitative and qualitative studies is evaluated on the basis of different criteria.
Grounded theory is a systematic method of conducting research that shapes collecting data and provides explicit strategies for analyzing them.
Furthermore, through reflections on the context of the research in question, the understanding, interpretation, sensemaking, and inferences put forward in the study are evaluated together with their strengths and limitations.
Guizzardi, G., de Almeida Falbo, R., Guizzardi, R.S.
2006; Marková and Plichtová 2007), or interpersonal: senior-junior (Hall et al.
And while transcribing the audio recordings any individual supervisors and organisation identification should be replaced with pseudonyms or omitted altogether.
Digital technologies now allow this information to be converted and linked to the final research report in various ways.
Often global in composition, the members of those early virtual villages were typically weakly tied because of the realities of physical geography.
The methodological, collaborative reflexivity is overcoming individual rationality to collective rationality and incorporating local understanding
Sorting prevents over-conceptualization and pre-conceptualization, since these excesses fall away as analyst zeros in on the most parsimonious set of integrated concepts.
Point of view: How open science helps researchers succeed.
terms but the literature uses the word "capacity".
Then, the codes that emerged first-hand are reorganized by combining, rephrasing, and eliminating some of them (25-30 codes).
The constant message of being nerdish; Interviewer: You became bullied because you were different?
In our own work we have begun experimenting with automated transcription processes using voice recognition software.
Ultimately, this type of research which's aim is conceptual thinking and theory building, is based upon an interpretivist approach as the researcher wants to see the social world from the participant's perspective and consider the participant's perception of the world (Edwards & Skinners, 2009).
Competency question What are the different ActivityTypes in a given dataset?
However, availability depends on the type of software.
"Judging by the cover": A grounded theory of same country and immigrant bullying.
There are several reasons why this might be the case: First, there are several ethical and epistemological concerns that researchers face when deciding whether sharing data from qualitative projects is possible and advisable.
According to [26] an algorithm, like a method, describes a sequence of activities that are executed by a computer.
Such a procedure can help uncover the differences in interpretation, clarify equivocal rules, identify ambiguity in the text, and finally quantify the level of agreement obtained by coders.
We support a worldview that acknowledges human creativity [36].
The first is the growing trend toward cloud computing.
A pebble has physical capacities like a certain weight and friction on which the attributed capacity of stopping a door builds.
To begin analyzing data, Glaser and Strauss advocated comparing and coding the data.
437) not only led her to understand these mothers' actions but also to construct the concept of temporal emotions.
The pursuit of quality in grounded theory Kathy Charmaz & Robert Thornberg To cite this article: Kathy Charmaz & Robert Thornberg (2021) The pursuit of quality in grounded theory, Qualitative Research in Psychology, 18:3, 305-327, DOI: 10.1080/14780887.2020.1780357 To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/14780887.2020.1780357
The pattern of semi-structured interviews allow and enable the researcher to have prepared a topic guide or relevant questions to be covered with each participant in one setting (Polit & Beck, 2008).
[21] Similarly, this PhD student-in her e-mail cry to me for help-wanted to do a GT dissertation but was caught up in QDA and descriptive capture.
Its primary function is to integrate the theory and render it dense and saturated.
Every scientific enterprise tries to find out something that will apply to everything of a certain kind by studying a few examples, the result of the study being, as we say, ‘generalizable'.
Despite the emphasis on objectivity, objective reality, objectification, and quantification in quantitative research, which is based on a positivist and reductionist approach, the emphasis in qualitative research, which has a different paradigm, is on understanding and interpreting the experience (situation and phenomenon) studied in its integrity, complexity, authenticity, and contextuality.
Department of Planning, Danish Center of Environmental Assessment, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark
See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Although we understand its appeal for recreational computer users, we see it as a regressive trend that is good for those who run the data servers but bad for researchers and their participants because of the relinquishing of control it involves.
The article closes with a look at the implications of emerging issues, such as the trend to cloud computing, the proliferation of mobile devices, and the maturation of voice recognition software.
We are witnessing a multidisciplinary, digital paradigm that cannot be solely defined in terms of traditional scientific cognition.
An Ontology of IS Design Science Research Artefacts Chapter in Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing · June 2020 DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-50316-1_8
With the digitalisation of qualitative research and the prevalence of CAQDAS among researchers, a new style of thinking and approach in qualitative data analysis is taking shape based on collaborative methodology and teamwork.
Effective communication is also paramount, especially in virtual settings where physical cues are lacking.
Thus, when he/she does begin to focus, he/she is sure of relevance.
The structure of a triple is similar to a simple statement which contains a subject, a predicate (verb), and an object.
It is also the designer and user who jointly and sometimes after a process of negotiation attribute capacities to the technical object.
The first step in gaining theoretical sensitivity is to enter the research setting with as few predetermined ideas as possible-especially logically deducted, a prior hypotheses.
This was annotated using the Prov-O extension of the BONSAI ontology.
Their authors discussed how we could study societal conditions and cultural preferences with Internet data.
Comparisons in QDA research are between far more general ideas that do not lead to tightly grounded categories.
The way that the components are assembled by the make plan, has become a design object itself.
See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The publications in the field of CAQDAS show that software development and its analytical functionalities tend towards the methods and procedures of textual and visual data content analysis.
Kapriskie Seide (in Charmaz 2020, 166) conducted firsthand research on the situation in Haiti during the cholera epidemic.
An organizational system that includes humans (for instance, a defense system) is not a technical object.
To do so, domain experts develop competency questions.
Citation: Bryda, Grzegorz, and António Pedro Costa.
The unit of analysis could be individuals, dyads, groups, and organizations.
Moreover, social media sentiment analysis and large-scale surveys provide researchers with more prosperous and diverse datasets.
The use plan of the ER model imbricates with the make plan of the database, while the use plan of the IT application (with database) is imbricates with the make plan of the IS (the analysis/design model of the IS).
The model can be analyzed mathematically or by simulation [30].
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any way.
We have founded IS artefacts on writing technology.
Methods are described as ways to implement models, and instantiations as the integrated result.
2 The software and code to convert YSTAFDB data to RDF format are available at https://github.com/BONSAMURAIS/ystafdb 3 The software and code to convert EXIOBASE data to RDF format are available at https://github.com/BONSAMURAIS/EXIOBASE-conversion-software
I was in the outpatient clinic during the first week of my urology internship.
If I repeat, it will be from different vantage points to undo QDA remodeling in the service of advancing the GT perspective.
Of course, effective collaboration in qualitative research depends on the classes of research and analytical methods applied, the number of people participating in the project, or the project scale.
It supports cross-domain data and knowledge sharing and avoids the creation of research data silos.
Besides providing alternate ways of reviewing data, audio and video excerpts can give consumers of research opportunities to see and hear the researcher in action.
A research report can include hyperlinks that connect the reader to the full transcription, giving the consumer access to the complete interview or observation document, for their review.
[8] is a detailed analysis of the "aboutness" relation, and how to deal with cases where the entity that the information content entity is about does not exist.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press
To the extent this becomes inevitable, researchers should choose their web and data servers well, and ideally develop the capacity to run their own.
Qualitative research focuses in understanding a research query as a humanistic or idealistic approach.
The social sciences, education, health and medicine, business, and the humanities are just a few of the fields that employ CAQDAS.
Individual or collective entities such as organizations or groups (households, governments, capital ownership, etc.)
The ReferenceUnit of a flow is not required to be the same for all flows of the same activity but is a way to state what other measure each specific flow should be seen as proportional to, something that may depend of the original source of the flow measures.
However, this information could be incorporated by developing extensions of the core ontology.
[1] In the case of qualitative data, the explicit goal is description.
Design specifies an artefact and consists of three parts (specifications).
It ‘refers to the level of aggregation of the data collected during the subsequent data analysis stage'.
He or she brings it into a QDA research design to comply with the strictures and professional expectations of the dominant paradigm.
Additions of email or discussion forum features to this environment would provide an infrastructure for continued dialogue about the descriptions and findings presented.
This framework is useful to store conceptual information about the data, that is, how one datapoint is related to another.
But it was the experiences of peer victimization; only when the bullying started that I began to feel A lingering sense of being different; different, that I didn't fit in.
In quantitative research grounded on theories and hypotheses, there is a subject-object relationship.
abusive supervision (Khan, Qureshi, & Ahmad, 2010; Tepper, 2000) in an organization, qualitative data gathered through face-to-face, focus group, telephonic etc.
Conceptual model of the artefact and artefact network
We each own several desktop computers and laptops and prefer to work using multiple monitors, and then there are the microphones, radio transmitters, and web and data servers.
There is of course a potential downside to this more passive bait-and-wait technique, which is that while a single positive statement by a significant group member may be helpful in viral transmission of the researcher's appeal, a single negative one can undermine the study in that forum.
In extracting phenomena from the data, we often engage in data reduction using statistical methods.
Digital tools empower policymakers with data-driven insights, fostering more informed decision-making.
For example, the tape recorder has always been a tool sine qua non for qualitative researchers, and the contemporary digital recorder is no less.
Web surveys to digital movies: Technological tools of the trade.
For them, initial coding meant labeling snippets of data to take them apart while being attentive to the meanings and actions suggested by these data.
Rushing or forcing the process will shut down the analyst's creativity and conceptual abilities, exhausting the energy and leaving the researcher empty and the theory thin and incomplete.
For example, psycholo gists have conducted many important studies about resilience.
All content following this page was uploaded by Savilla Banister on 19 July 2014.
NDRIO can support this initiative by providing a platform for disseminating information and education to researchers about the digital research infrastructure options available to them as well as training on the ethical and epistemological implications of using digital research infrastructure.
Qualitative research is based on three paradigms and main paradigms within the qualitative research are positivist, interpretivist, and critical paradigms (Punch, 1998).
With this type of data the audience is also able to critique the researcher's accuracy in descriptions of the setting.
4.5 Ethical Issues ‘Ethics begins and ends with you, the researcher' (Neuman, 2011, p.
Some of these are already possible within various data repositories, although not all options are available - for example, Dataverse is a repository which provides researchers with a great deal of control over access to their data; however, this does not provide an option for longterm control and stewardship by a qualified third party.
Thus, they are observable and open to public inspection.
Incorporation of digital, hyperlinked data throughout a research manuscript addresses English's (2000) concerns about independent access to information from a qualitative study.
The researchers interviewed the 21 students who had been bullied for more than one year.
According to Glaser (1992) grounded theory deals with only inductive approach rather than deductive approach of inquiry.
Such inclusion could conceivably add hundreds of pages of text to a research report.
Never let another person interrupts the interview; do not let another person answer for the respondent or offer his or her opinions on the question.
However, not much has been written yet on the ontological status of artefacts or their structure.
The purpose is to establish the best fit of many choices of concepts to a set of indicators, the conceptual levels between the concepts that refer to the same set of indicators and the integration into hypotheses between the concepts, which becomes the theory.
For example, all classes are instances of Resource; all properties are instances of Class; range and domain are instances of the class Property.
Challenges for qualitative researchers include:  Ethical considerations may preclude the possibility of storing data for future re-use.
(2013) constructed codes that fit the data by engaging in initial coding, in which they compared data with data, data with codes, and codes with codes, and stayed close to and remained open to exploring what they interpreted was happening in the data.
[16] CRESWELL in his book "Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design" (1998) lumps GT into comparisons with phenomenology, ethnography, case study and biographical life history.
The model is both a make-plan for the technical artefact database, and instantiates "the ER model" artefact.
Nia, M., de Vries, M.: Models as artefacts of a dual nature: a philosophical contribution to teaching about models designed and used in engineering practice.
Exemplary teachers using technology: The impact in a fifth grade classroom.
Challenges remain concerning the intrusiveness, or non-intrusiveness, of the researcher, accuracy of their descriptions, and the appropriateness or contextual relevance of the data selected for inclusion in final presentations (Peshkin, 2000).
Such an approach, based on the qualitative interview literature, helped Thornberg et al.
Sometimes, it is the case that the IT research provides knowledge about the technical feasibility and performance of the artefact and the IM research extends the design knowledge by studying its effects in context.
Although our ontology will be structured differently, with more emphasis on the design, we concur with IAO with respect to the material basis of information artefacts.
250) further summarized the grounded theory history, since its inception in 1967, in the appended below words...
This process streamlines data analysis and ensures that qualitative researchers can easily handle extensive and complex datasets.
A question of quality: The Malcolm Baldrige Criteria applied to education.
‘Grounded' means that the theory will be generated on the basis of data; the theory will therefore be grounded in data.
While the solo, largely self-funded researcher is likely to take some time to accumulate these tools, those who engage in larger projects should be able to write in such purchases fairly easily; they would be a relatively small line item on any half-million dollar budget.
They take notes on the process and explain the changes made during the process with their justifications.
Through this synthesis of technology and tradition, CAQDAS bridges traditional data analysis methods and the modern, digitised methods enabled by technological advancements between historical methodologies and the demands of contemporary practices.
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
database, industrial ecology, interoperable data, ontology, open data, Semantic Web
The evolution of research methodologies has always been influenced by technological advancements and the changing ways we interact with the world.
The essential property of the WWW is its universality, that is, it does not discriminate between data sources.
This method helps them to generate new concepts in their discipline and the larger research literature.
For example, in this current study we use RDFLib and SPARQL queries to integrate and retrieve information, respectively, from the datasets converted to machine-readable format using BONSAI ontology.
She has also written or co-authored numerous articles and chapters about qualitative research.
Kuhn (1970) is famous as a first researcher for using paradigms in the context of a framework to understand inquiry.
The objective is clear: to attain a nuanced comprehension of the data and rigorously evaluate the effectiveness of the analytical strategies employed.
soon came along to "do" html invisibly with a point-and-click interface that made every user a possible web designer.
Both constant comparing and modifying are two vital tenants of GT.
Glaser and Strauss do not regard the procedures of grounded theory as discipline specific, and they encourage researchers to use the procedures for their own disciplinary purposes.
The reframing/contextualization of the qualitative study is evaluated through reflections on the contexts of the experience, the research design and the team; its strengths and limitations are discussed.
The preplanned coding efforts of routine QDA to suit the preconceived professional problem easily remodel GT by stifling its approach.
Accordingly, this paper provides a methodological reconstruction of Glaser and Strauss's perspective on social science inquiry.
The Structure of scientific revolutions (2nd ed.).
○ Domain: The classes whose instances constitute the set of resources that participate as subject in a given property.
In clinical research, qualitative approach can help view the data more extensively.
Starting before emergence with the professional interest, a problem is very likely to result in research with little or no relevance in GT-just routine QDA description with "as if" importance.
Wang, X., Guarino, N., Guizzardi, G., Mylopoulos, J.: Towards an Ontology of Software: a Requirements Engineering Perspective.
Ethics and institutional conflict of interest: The research confidentiality controversy at Simon Fraser University.
I care about the main concerns of anyone attempting to contextualize practice.
The rapid advancement of technology has reshaped many sectors, with qualitative research being prominently affected.
The couple looked around in the short corridor and our doctor called their names and called them into the room.
The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research.
‘The idea of holism which assumes that particular parts can be described only by the knowledge of their meaning and position in the whole, is the basis of the conception of the perception of reality as complex systems' [12].
It should also be noted that the scope of the literature review was mainly on design research conferences, and not the IS literature as a whole.
CAQDAS plays a pivotal role in data management and the overarching research process within these disciplines.
Over the past years, the applications of CAQDAS have expanded, moving beyond its original purpose.
They follow Osterweil in describing software as something non-physical and intangible.
The aim is to re-narrate in the voice of one to two representative participants, using sample statements, one to two typical experiences that emerged from the analyses, in a way that vividly reflects the experience and the context in which the experience took place.
She reveals how certain present feelings like regret or hope can only be felt by crossing timeframes from the present to the past or future.
Second framework: a four-phased contextual understanding, interpretation, and reporting framework In this model, which was developed by assuming a different paradigm, the processes of understanding and interpretation are framed.
The carefully conducted interviews and the systematic use of grounded theory methods made sure that the final grounded theory of double victimiz ing in school bullying reached empirical grounding (Strauss and Corbin 1998) as the theory and its concepts clearly fitted with the data (Glaser 1998), and demonstrated credibility (Charmaz 2014; Strauss and Corbin 1998) and trust worthiness (Strauss and Corbin 1998).
Multi-layered reading and analysis: Based on the two to three main contexts identified in the previous stage, the text is read and analysed separately for each context.
The iconic mode of representation frequently involves simulating reality in a concrete visualizable image.
System theory is not so much about a particular class of objects, but is a particular view: the holistic view, in contrast to a reductionist view.
This representation should be supported to contribute to discussions about the long-term stewardship of qualitative data that requires careful controls and restrictions, particularly with sensitive, contextual data that could potentially identify participants if it were shared with other researchers for secondary analysis and re-use.
In this regard, monitoring of discussions at the site made clear that just as Atchison had used the Internet to his advantage in order to locate the group and engage them as the launching point for his appeal, so, too, did the participants employ their online savvy to find out more about him.
Big Data, Digital Humanities, and new technologies introduce a novel epistemological perspective on designing and implementing social research.
The researcher is blocked and no longer freed by the power and autonomy offered by GT to arrive at new emergent, generated theory.
To repeat, GT methodology is a straightforward approach to theory generation.
Juxtaposing video footage of the kindergarten students during center-time and the audio transcription of the kindergarten teacher's interview about computer use during center-time also provides the reader with a uniquely-triangulated description (Video 2).
They promised that grounded theory would give ordinary researchers the tools to construct solid theories in their respective areas.
The interviews can be audio-taped with permission from the participant to ascertain an accurate account of the interview which can be replayed for analytic purposes and anonymity should be assured during the course of the
Video-taped interviews and researcher's commentaries can be woven into the final product, and supporting Journal of the Research Center for Educational Technology (RCET) Vol.
[63] Early on memos arise from constant comparison of indicators to indicators, then indicators to concepts.
How and where data are digitized, stored, and accessed is indicative of attitudes toward intellectual, political, and territorial sovereignty (Kukutai & Taylor 2016; Rainie et al., 2017; Wemigwans, 2018).
Example: Query on EXIOBASE to identify determining flow for "Copper production" PREFIX <Specify namespace of ontology used.
Because we are reaching the point where virtually everyone has a cell phone, wireless connectedness allows us to envision the possibility where everyone in our audience can download our survey or interview questions and respond right away by text, voice, or video.
Once a researcher begins to utilize the properties of a hypertext environment, she can then pursue the addition of media elements to her portraiture products.
To place Glaser and Strauss's position in context, it helps to know more about what was happening in US sociology departments of the 1960s.
Concrete approaches such as SOA are a DSR artefact.
Some general ethical issues in research that result in some prohibitions are: never cause unnecessary or irreversible harm to participants, secure prior voluntary consent when possible and never unnecessarily humiliate, degrade, or release harmful information about specific individuals that was collected for research purposes.
The grounded theory method not only helps researchers to synthesize data but, moreover, to move beyond descrip tion through constructing new concepts that explicate what is happening.
This delimiting occurs at two levels-the theory and the categories.
With the theoretical/conceptual framework that emerges from the qualitative study, the experience (situation and phenomenon) that is the subject of the research is re-contextualized and theoretically reframed.
2 authors, including: Savilla Banister Bowling Green State University 36 PUBLICATIONS 535 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE
From a design science perspective, information systems and their components are viewed as artefacts.
First framework: a three-phased contextual (multiple) reading and analysis framework
We support the value of encouraging a plurality of perspectives in the production of knowledge, rather than resting simply on the idea of storing and sharing data in order to replicate or verify previous research findings.
By addressing such requirements, expanding of our proposed LCSA ontology with these MFA and ABM-relevant concepts would complete the ontology from an Industrial Ecology perspective.
The library is part of the make plan of the program, while at the same time should comply with the use plan of the library.
The entity was defined in a new class called FlowObject.
Hordge-Freeman writes: When I discovered that one woman was sleeping on the floor in their family's home and several others had been working for no pay in adoptive families for over 40 years, I was overwhelmed with a sense of anger over this injustice.
In this case, we call the models analysis/design models.
Modern professionals should be familiar with various software and platforms and adept at leveraging their intricate features and functionalities.
3 (1988): 303-52, and Woodward, "Data and Phenomena," Synthese 79, no.
such as LCA and input output analysis to analyze the environmental pressures of economic activities (Beylot et al., 2019; Schmidt & De Rosa, 2020; Schmidt et al., 2021).
(2) Relevance: Does it have relevance to the people in the substantive field?
The book legitimized inductive qualitative research and made coding and memo-writing integral strategies of qualitative inquiry.
It cannot fail as the social psychological world of structure, culture, social interaction, social organization etc.
Findings indicate that incorporating digital resources can provide "e-readers" with evidence relating to issues of methodologies, researcher intrusiveness, participant voice, and context.
2018; Tsai, Seballos-Llena, and Castellano-Datta 2017; Wójcik 2018).
However, this is a minor problem as disk space is becoming cheaper.
The constructivist approach does not seek truth - single, universal, and lasting.
While the ontology was sufficient to annotate the EXIOBASE datasets, it could not be used to annotate additional information on criticality, and recyclability of materials from YSTAFDB.
The originators of grounded theory, sociologists Glaser and Strauss, sought to defend the quality of qualitative research and argued that grounded theory increased its quality by providing a method of theory construction.
A system is defined as a composite of elements with attributes and relationships between them that makes a meaningful whole.
The second, which we have only begun to consider, involves the possibilities that are opening up because of the virtual revolution of portable computing power brought about by the iPhone, Blackberry, Google, and their respective apps.
In speaking against "logico-deductive theorizing," Glaser and Strauss, in effect, level two criticisms at the method: first, it grossly exaggerates the place of theory-testing in science; and second, it improperly denies that inductive reasoning can figure in the formulation of theoretical ideas.
More in general, we can talk about writing technology that started with clay tablets and papyrus and nowadays is evolving into digital technology.
Be flexible and optional Digital research infrastructure for qualitative researchers should provide researchers with the ability to store and share some or all parts of their data and project materials as they and their participants deem appropriate.
The "core category" of grounded theory: Making constant compar isons.
At least two compatibility problems can be identified: the codebook problem (using codes) and the segmentation problem (applying codes to texts).
Yet, with the digital revolution of the past two decades, the surge of new information technologies, and the rise of digital media, CAQDAS has expanded its reach and has found broader applications.
What are the dominant patterns of professional identity formation (PIF) in narratives of clinical experiences?
Phase 3 - understanding and interpreting in different contexts and presenting the situation subject to the research in multiple ways While writing the discussion and interpretation section of the qualitative research, the findings of the study are compared with the literature and the situation subject to the research is tried to be understood and interpreted.
The datasets were annotated using the BONSAI ontology and converted into RDF using software developed by the BONSAI community based on RDFlib.2,3 Each datapoint gets its own IRI.
The conflict is most often resolved by the preponderance of QDA research and GT loses this vital aspect.
Significantly, AEI method gives similar advice, but in a more constructive way: Because we often do not have knowledge of the nature of the causal mechanisms we abductively probe, we are urged to construct models of those mechanisms by imagining something analogous to mechanisms whose nature we do know.13 More specifically, theory elaboration in science is frequently a matter of constructing what have been called iconic paramorph models.
Website: www.picronline.org DOI: 10.4103/2229-3485.115389
Beyond these tangible benefits, digitality also plays a transformative role in governance and policymaking.
Psychologists have subscribed to this wide range of qualitative methods and contributed to their development.
Theoretical sorting is based on theoretical codes.
Once a model is part of the latter conversation, it may be called a techno-scientific object.
psychologists study an amazing array of problems and are affiliated with a wide range of programs, including those in medicine and psychiatry, educa tion, religion, ethnic and gender studies, and business, to name a few.
See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The paper does not try to analyze ontologically how these types are related.
While we will not comment on what programmes like NVivo and ATLAS.ti can do, we would like to observe that these programmes are in their relative infancy and companies like QSR (the parent of NVivo) are actively working with members of the qualitative and mixed methods research community (academic and commercial alike) to build features into the next generation of these programmes that reflect the needs and applications of those who could benefit from the use of this software.
The goal of the work system may be to build a robot.
Notably, it assists in illustrating patterns and trends and aids qualitative researchers in visualizing code relations and creating semantic networks (Bryda 2019, 2020).
Our specialist was sending them away after ordering some tests when Mr.
Ontologies provide logical meaning to the data and the possibility to develop machine-readable data format.
The notion of simplicity Thagard deems most appropriate for theory choice is captured by the idea that preference should be given to theories that make fewer special assumptions.
A qualitative analysis and interpretation proposal: contextual, reflective, and narrative model While qualitative data analysis and interpretation processes are framed through reflectivity, the emphasis on contextuality and narrativity is not sufficient.
While the existing repositories and infrastructure may accommodate qualitative data files, the engagement of qualitative researchers with open science practices more broadly, and data sharing in particular, is considerably less than that of researchers working with quantitative data - the scope and volume of qualitative data available in open repositories "pales in comparison to the volume of archived quantitative data" available for re-use (Jones et al., 2018).
[11] I will deal with as many of the blocks as I see relevant but certainly not all.
Thus, the current landscape underscores the importance of "Thick Data" amidst the prevailing "Big Data" epoch (Jemielniak 2020).
As such, GT procedures and ideas are used to legitimate and buttress routine QDA methodology.
The analyst codes for as many categories as fit successive, different incidents, while coding into as many categories as possible.
Lois theorizes that how people handle temporal emotions influences their relative continuity of self over time.
It is a comprehensive, integrated and highly structured, yet eminently flexible process that takes a researcher from the first day in the field to a finished written theory.
Specific properties such as bont:determiningFlow and bont:referenceFlowObject are further defined as functional properties, that is, connect to single unique instance IRI.
Whereas empirical sciences acquire knowledge about the natural world (physics) or human behavior (social sciences), Design Science Research (DSR) is interested in IT artefacts, such as algorithms, methods and modeling languages, and the effectiveness of their use.
Review Board Kadee Anstadt, Perrysburg City Schools Savilla Banister, Bowling Green State University William Bauer, Case Western Reserve University Sebastian Diaz, West Virginia University Evelyn Goldsmith, Kent State University Albert Ingram, Kent State University Jan Kelly, Mogadore Local Schools Annette Kratcoski, Kent State University
(13) After you have completed your analysis, compare it with relevant material from the literature, which may well include case studies and perspectives that you did not address during your earlier review.
In recent years there has been a rapid increase in the number and availability of open databases (such as EXIOBASE, USLCI, YSTAFDB) that are specifically meant to be used by researchers working with assessment tools such as life cycle and material flow assessments (Ingwersen, 2015; Merciai & Schmidt, 2018; Myers
Other groups of focused codes were further merged into other more comprehensive categories such as ‘a sense of not fitting in' and ‘self-blaming'.
In taking a theory as given, the hypotheticodeductive method is not itself concerned with that theory's origin or creation, only with its validation or justification.
‘For a positivist researcher, the purpose of research is to understand, ‘how the world works so that the events can be controlled or predicted'(Neuman, 1991, p.
I have written at length on "all is data" and on forcing in "Doing Grounded Theory" (GLASER, 1998a).
Epistemological issues and re-use of qualitative data: Qualitative inquiry is not the same as postpositivist forms of inquiry The epistemological commitments of many qualitative researchers are founded in interpretivism and subjectivism, which emphasizes the idea that reality and knowledge is relational and gained by accessing individuals' subjective perspectives and interpretations (Jones et al., 2018; Tamminen & Poucher, 2020).
Clarity, consistency, parsimony, density, scope, integration, fit to data, explanatory power, predictiveness, heuristic worth, and application are all mentioned by Glaser and Strauss as pertinent evaluative criteria, although they do not work them into a coherent view of theory appraisal.
A digital document that contains links to observation and interview transcriptions, as well as bibliographic information, allows a reader to explore the study in more depth.
Simondon, G.: On the Mode of Existence of Technical Objects Minneapolis: Univocal Publishing.
Trying conceptually to locate the first memos will force the analyst to start reasoning out the integration.
Theoretical coding helps in deciding and in figuring out the meaning of the relation of a concept to the core variable.
In the literature, there are various concrete proposals and models for the analysis and interpretation of qualitative data.
Grounded theory and grounded theorizing: Pragmatism in research practice.
For example, it is difficult to frequently update the information and manage large repositories in conditions when data need to be continuously collected (Sobhkhiz et al., 2021).
(2016) demonstrated that structuring LCA databases using an ontology linked to the Semantic Web supports data interpretation, thus giving additional information and control to database users.
Journal of the Research Center for Educational Technology (RCET) Vol.
Grounded theory; constructivist grounded theory; quality; qualitative research; credibility
Computing the compatibility of coding is used to compare coding consistency between several coders.
But when they started to tease me, push me around, and when I was frozen out all the time, I began to understand that I was different.
It means openness to scrutinizing who the researcher is.
In addition, LCA is often used in combination with other tools such as MFA and input-output analysis or use complementary data to provide comprehensive analysis of impacts from production and consumption of goods and services (Crawford, Bontinck, Stephan, Wiedmann, & Yu, 2018; Lavers Westin et al., 2019; Malik, McBain, Wiedmann, Lenzen, & Murray, 2019; Pauliuk et al., 2016) .
We stood up eagerly at the same time as if we had agreed because none of us had ever seen a varicocele examination before.
Artefacts are said to be the object of Design Science Research, but their ontological status is often taken for granted.
For example, this type of narrative/observation/interview combination is demonstrated in the third grade case study when the topic of technical support for classroom computers was explored (Video 1).
Coding gets the analyst off the empirical level by fracturing the data, then conceptually grouping it into codes that then become the theory that explains what is happening in the data.
For example, the EXIOBASE dataset is shared as a set of excel spreadsheets and YSTAFDB datasets are provided as plain text CSV files.
However, http://www.ed.uiuc.edu/EPS/PES-Yearbook/95_docs/haig.html (7 of 11)8/4/2006 9:04:24 AM
A software program like Ms-Word is a technical artefact.
Although we can discern similarities and differences between various ver sions of grounded theory, we offer a general set of guidelines.
I will address some, but not all, of the myriad of remodeling blocks to classic GT analysis brought on by lacing it with QDA descriptive methodological requirements.
Incorporating audio and video data into the research design helps to extend the potential of thick description.
Reweaving a fragmented self: A grounded theory of self-understanding among Chinese women students in the United States of America.
One ontological question is whether the code that is the make plan of the software artefact is an artefact itself.
In such a reflective process, the qualitative study becomes stronger in terms of criteria such as credibility, confirmability, and transferability.
Later, under my guidance, she let the main concern emerge and did an amazingly good dissertation on binary deconstruction between social worker and client.
From a Design Science perspective, techno-scientific models of the domain artefacts and the related systems are artefacts on a second level that typically focus on some aspect of the domain artefact.
We have a problem with calling a program instance non-physical and at the same time saying that it is constituted by (physical) code.
The association for the study of medical education.
So just take these points as flexible guidelines to consider when conducting qualitative inquiry in general or constructing a grounded theory study in particular.
For psychologists, rich data usually means learning and collecting the stories of people who have had or are having a specific experience.
[26] MORSE continues her description of GT: "Synthesis is facilitated by adequacy of the data and the processes of analysis.
Grounded theory needs its own set of criteria for evaluating quality due to its unique features (cf., Berthelsen, Grimshaw-Aagaard, and Hansen 2018; Chiovitti and Piran 2003; Elliott and Lazenbatt 2005; Hutchison, Johnston, and Breckon 2011), although grounded theorists cannot escape more general guidelines concerning their use of data gathering methods to ensure quality in doing interviews, fieldwork etc.
This interchangeability produces, at the same time, the transferability of the theory to other areas by linking to incidents (indicators) in other substantive or subsubstantive areas that produce the same category or properties of it.
Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health and Well-being 1 (2):109-19.
The internet and the state: Instrument of control or subversive technology?
This potential sidelining is especially pertinent when discussing qualitative research.
IT researchers are typically more focused on developing components, e.g.
Analysis, interpretation, and reporting of qualitative data Data analysis and reporting in qualitative studies begin with data collection based on the conceptual framework and research problems determined.
By 2007, Kenneth Gergen (in Cisneros-Puebla 2007) dismissed Glaser and Strauss's (1967) grounded theory as passé because of its reliance on empiricism, an epistemological approach ‘holding that all knowledge of mat ters of fact either arises from experience or requires experience for its valida tion' (APA Dictionary of Psychology).
Several formats can be harnessed by qualitative researchers to enhance their work.
The researcher struggles with capturing authentic representations of a phenomenon clearly, without allowing the technology of cameras, microphones, and staged lighting to disrupt and intrude upon the environment under study.
Further compounding the situation is the heightened rivalry from the corporate realm, which often has superior access to data.
They used the classification to develop a relational database, which is open source and can be used as a platform to share IE data (Pauliuk et, al., 2019).
Gaining this understanding can lead to rethinking or relinquishing cherished disciplinary concepts that researchers might have believed would fit their data.
This essay seeks to stimulate conversation around the benefits and challenges of collaborative research for researchers and how technology facilitates this collaborative approach.
A primary barrier is that the framework of the principles and technologies required to link and query data from the Semantic Web is often beyond the scope of industrial ecologists.
An Activity is a specific occurrence of an ActivityType, in a particular spatial and temporal scope.
Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 39(1), 37-47.
A second area that causes us concern, which is related to most researchers not having their own web and data servers, concerns the new tendency toward cloud computing, in which users store data on someone else's server.
These issues and others are debated at length in the qualitative research literature.
Some commercial CAQDAS programs, including Atlas TI, NVivo, Maxqda, and webQDA, offer solutions facilitating collaborative analysis, like client-server or cloud-based working spaces, enabling researchers to collaborate without jeopardising data security.
In this step, further reading and analysis is carried out independently by two researchers.
These stu dents often experienced a fragmented self before their arrival in the US.
It is also the fundamental specification for data representations on the Semantic Web.
In short, Glaser and Strauss declared that inductive qualitative research with rich first-hand data could lead to theory construction and that adhering to canons of objectivity, validity, reliability and replicability would inhibit theo rizing.
Second, researchers lack guidance, training, and support about the options available to them to support open data sharing: the landscape of data repositories and support is complex and fragmented, and there is a lack of guidance on where and how researchers may store and share qualitative data.
The application has been designed by humans, driven consciously or unconsciously by social values.
It often represents design knowledge about some artefact (and so not a design science artefact itself), but it can also be a semi-component design object and then it is indeed (on the type level) a genuine DSR artefact.
(3) Are there many conceptual linkages, and are the categories well developed?
The term computational turn refers to the process by which new techniques and methodologies are drawn from computer science (including interactive information visualisation, scientific visualisation, data pre/processing, geospatial representation, statistical data analysis, network analysis, natural language processing, and data/text mining), and related fields (cognitive science, machine learning, data science, and computational linguistics) are implemented in the humanities and social sciences.
We construe NVivo as more of an information management tool that can be useful throughout the research process.
Their ability to tap into vast virtual networks allows qualitative researchers to observe and actively immerse themselves in the investigative process.
Today, most grounded theory studies are based on interviews.
} What is the provenance of a specific flow in a given database?
Grounded theory in historical perspective: An epistemolo gical account.
The extended and additional information passed on to the reader allows for greater trustworthiness.
However, theoretical sampling has nothing to do with representative sampling.
For such datapoints, specific IRI(s) were created to ensure this information can still be converted to RDF.
This disconnect between the technological possibilities and their adoption is glaring.
Of the varieties of scientific realism, I think evolutionary naturalistic realism recommends itself as the best of contending theories.
A little more relaxed, the couple moved to the two chairs opposite.
Creativity and intuitiveness in design of the user interface is key.
Metaphors A war where everyone is on their guard Three minutes that seemed like forever Sitting guiltily in your seat Invisibility
The theoretical decision about the precise location of a particular memo-as the analyst sees similarities, connections and underlying uniformities-is based on the theoretical coding of the data that is grounding the idea.
However, what these terms mean in research practice may differ among researchers.
Model: Taking this into account, by considering a contextual, reflective, and narrative approach, two frameworks, namely, the ‘Contextual (Multiple) Reading and Analysis Framework' consisting of three stages and seven steps, and the ‘Contextual Understanding, Interpretation and Reporting Framework' consisting of four stages, were developed.
Another way is to write narratives during the reporting process.
At this point, the Internet ceased to be viewed as a distinct "cyberspace" or an extension of offline society.
Prudent selection of digital platforms for research, hence, not only safeguards data but also enhances the reliability and validity of the research findings, ensuring that they are derived from a secure and stable digital environment.
Such theories aim to understand meanings and actions and how people construct them, and they ‘bring in the subjectivity of the actor and may recognize the subjectivity of the researcher' (p.
This article critically reflects on qualitative research and the qualitative computer data analysis process, emphasising its significance in harnessing digital opportunities and shaping collaborative work.
Potential themes Clinical workload, work-orientedness (routine, technical processes), and the de-humanization Emotional, culturally unsafe encounters Authoritarian language and discourse in the patient- physician relationship Contextual elements, features Physical, social, relational context: Locked doors, sequential, authorized entrances Four small windowless rooms, 9 people where even 1 person is too many Relating through work, not seeing what is humane, what is cultural Social, cultural context: Power relationship/authoritarian relationship, authoritarian, reactive discourse, and behaviours, e.g.
Though quantitative approach is a more reliable method as it is based upon numeric and methods that can be made objectively and propagated by other researchers.
THEORY GENERATION According to the stark prescriptions of hypothetico-deductive method, one takes a hypothesis or theory and tests it indirectly by deriving from it consequences that are themselves amenable to direct empirical test.
Emerging styles of social control on the Internet: Justice denied.
F I G U R E 1 Diagrammatic representation of the BONSAI ontology.
The digitalisation of qualitative research and the growing prevalence of CAQDAS is forging a new paradigm in qualitative data analysis built on collaboration and teamwork (Seror 2012).
She is caught by the QDA approach to force the data for a professional concern.
These terminologies offer valuable insights into the various dimensions of research collaboration and provide a foundation for further exploration and understanding in this rapidly evolving field.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)
Becoming proficient in qualitative research methodologies and computer-assisted data analysis is closely linked to grasping and applying new digital technologies and enhancing digital skills.
Lincoln (Ed.), Handbook of qualitative research (pp.
Palys was among those who balked at the idea, in part because he believed (a) any technological specifics the group might suggest would undoubtedly be obsolete by the time they were published and (b) that there was no more need for special policies on Internet-based research than there was a need for unique policies for telephone-based research, or kitchen-based research.
Trying to envision the possibilities and stay ahead of the curve in the realm of technology-assisted social and health research, where it seems every week brings a new development, is equally enjoyable, but also a considerable challenge.
A web-based, refereed journal article (Banister, 2002), dissertation CD-ROM (Banister, 2001) and a research study on DVD (Banister, 2003) provide pieces of illustration and evidence for the conclusions drawn.
For example, Palys does face-to-face and legal research with Indigenous peoples whose traditional tribal, place, and personal names are far beyond the program's default capability, but can be produced unerringly by DNS with a few minutes of training.
Furthermore, these technologies stimulate citizen engagement, promote greater transparency, and enhance the accountability of governing entities.
These include education, nursing studies, political science, and to a very limited extent, psychology.
∙ Class: Resources are divided into groups called classes.
He had been seeing patients non-stop since 8 am and it was clear that he was already getting tired.
Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism (USA PATRIOT Act) Act of 2001, Pub.
recommend that you review the literature to establish a defensible rationale for the study, to avoid re-inventing the wheel, and to increase theoretical sensitivity.
It explains how the main concern is continually resolved.
Yet many gained more complex selves as they rewove cross-cultural insights into their self-understandings.
Sanjay Kalra, Bharti Hospital and BRIDE, Karnal, Haryana, India.
[2] These are a few of the problems of description.
Others are more analytic and account for a wider range of data.
An ICE can be concretized in an information carrier (e.g.
Despite its hegemonic status, hypothetico-deductivism is seriously deficient as a theory of scientific method.
gathered his courage and asked us not to be in the room when they returned.
The essence of this procedure is a dialectical interplay between the new world of digital technology and the classic methodology.
Start with the core variable and then sort all other categories and properties only as they relate to the core variable.
Instead, we now have a methodology that can easily handle vast qualitative (textual and visual) data sets, bridging the qualitative-quantitative divide and fostering the rise of mixed-methods research.
Whether we use traditional or digital, computer-assisted methods, it is essential to recognise that qualitative data analysis mandates the careful, systematic, and thorough management of substantial text data, such as interviews, notes, and internet data.
Our approach has involved trying to move out of our comfort zone and to look for applications of technology that are useful at each stage of the research process.
Participants should be reminded of their right to withdraw from the study or terminate the interview at any time before commencing the session.
There are currently seven such discussion boards in Canada with a collective membership of more than 220,000 people.
As a result, the Internet is now occupied by varying groups of people, including those in a highly dispersed physical space and others locally accessible, occasionally bridging online and offline relationships while at other times remaining within one or the other, and in some situations engaging in real time, while in others transcending it.
Journal notes, work logs, and transcriptions for research presentations provide the data in this investigation, as a teacher-researcher model was used (Burdell & Swadener, 1999; Hubbard & Power, 1999).
Concerns about quality in the development of grounded theory
Then use the focused codes to examine how they work with large batches of data.
Since its introduction in the 1960s, grounded theory has been progressively developed in a way that is consistent with its original formulation, such that it is currently the most comprehensive qualitative research methodology available.
This article will address this issue by describing some of the ways that qualitative researchers can incorporate digital technologies into their work.
However, their practical use is less about the tools themselves and more about the professional skill set that wields them.
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
Funding: The work of the first author was entitled "The domain ontology as a model of knowledge representation about the contemporary field of qualitative research" and financed from 2017 to 2021 by Narodowe Centrum Nauki (Poland, Project No.
In this Section, we first summarize the artefact ontology and illustrate it with some small examples.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
Memos are excellent source of directions for theoretical sampling-they point out gaps in existing analyses and possible new related directions for the emerging theory.
Lee, A., Thomas, M., Baskerville, R.: Going back to the basics in design science: from the information technology artefact to the information system artefact.
In a similar way, reviewing video footage that includes the researcher in the environment under study allows scholars to make judgments about the intrusiveness of the researcher.
These areas represent the evolution of research methodologies and the promising future of digitally augmented research.
This involves the third aspect of collaboration, creating an intersubjective space for open dialogue, discussion, and perspective-transcending knowledge.
I have also published many examples of a "good" GT analysis-"Examples of Grounded Theory" (GLASER, 1993), "Grounded Theory 1984 to 1994" (GLASER, 1995), "Gerund Grounded Theory" (GLASER, 1998b)-and have given many references in my books.
Her approach to line-by-line analysis is a bare reference to the constant comparative process, but that is all.
(1) Strive to achieve methodological self-consciousness (Charmaz 2017).
Qualitative inquiry is not ‘preliminary' or ‘ancillary' to ‘real research' (Sandelowski, 1997).
The criteria for establishing the core variable within a GT are that it is central, relating to as many other categories and their properties as possible and accounting for a large portion of the variation in a pattern of behavior.
In order to employ his viral recruitment strategy, Atchison informally analyzed the postings that community members had placed in the various publicly accessible discussion board threads in order to identify both conventional (e.g., newspapers, tabloids, or periodicals) and network-based (e.g., websites and newsgroups) media spaces that active online community members utilized.
To avoid any kind of identification of individuals, supervisors or organisations, the research can be based on employees' past experiences and perceptions of the phenomenon.
I really didn't dare to do things I wanted to do when other people were nearby.
An agent may have a location that may be different from the location of an Activity performed by it.
I believed all the stupid things they said about Becoming passive out of social fear; me.
Memos also begin to locate the emerging theory with other theories with potentially more or less relevance.
Numerous researchers use several grounded theory strategies for conducting thematic analyses (cf.
Step 3 - extended contextual reading and analysis.
Contextual understanding and interpretation spectrum.
Qualitative analysis on stage: Making the research process more public.
These multifaceted utilities ensure a transparent research process, bolstering methodological rigour and empowering scholars in their analytical endeavours.
The perspectives in clinical research should highlight advances in qualitative research as well, to optimize quality and utility of this method of research.
They believed only a few talented stars could produce qualitative studies worthy of academic attention.
(8) As you proceed, ask progressively focused questions about the data that help you develop your emerging analysis.
[41] The following is a summary of the essential elements of GT methodology: Bear in mind, when reading this summary, that the goal of GT is conceptual theory © 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
My goal will be to bring out the classic GT perspective on how GT analysis is done-to lay this method bare-and in the bargain to show how QDA blocks, as I have said, GT generation and product proof.
Sampling aimed toward theory construction, not for population representativeness.
Alternatively, based on a literature review of actual design research projects, [26] identified eight relevant artefact types: notation, requirement, metric, system design, method, algorithm, guideline and pattern.
Note that the ReferenceUnit should not be confused with the unit corresponding to the determining flow of an activity.
The answer to why becomes less important than the search for the answer to what.
Data stored in triplestores is retrieved using SPARQL query language.
sampling in comparison groups, do the successive requirements for data collection emerge-both (1) what categories and their properties to be sampled further and (2) where to collect the data.
These skills, encompassing technical, soft, and ethical dimensions, form the bedrock of quality research in our digital era (Janssen et al.
However, this possible reply is itself based on two misconceptions about scientific problems.
GT uses "all as data," of which these are just one kind of data.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0029-6554(97)90043-9 Sparkes, A.
Then, the GT label is used to legitimate the QDA research.
Yet, an evident paradox exists: while the technological potential is boundless, its full exploitation is hampered by researchers' reticence.
Data ownership has implications for who has the right to grant access to the data in the future and what controls are required.
**Suggested linking to other ontologies on the Semantic Web but not implemented.
These concepts may have direct application for professional policies and practices in psychology and beyond.
Without looking up from the computer, he asked them to hand him the barcode.
Here, both the experience that is the subject of the research and its context are presented in detail.
Location in time (historic time, future [model] time, time point, time interval)
Education and training are paramount to support researchers in making informed decisions about engaging in digital research infrastructure.
In YSTAFDB, the flow of a "reference material" or primary element/substance is mapped across different processes as the primary element transforms into products (e.g., refined metal, alloys, or tailing) defined under "material name." Hence, to annotate the FlowObjects, we combined the "reference material" and the "material name" into a single name.
The best we can do is to arrive at a truth that makes a difference that opens up new possibilities for understanding' (McLeod, 2001, p.
But by the time they made this unwelcome discovery, they had left the research site and often could not return.
Their book serves as a powerful tool for conducting grounded theory approach and has instructed graduates students all over the world (Charmaz, 2014).He, Charmaz (2006, pp.
We suggest that you first define a code by its properties or characteristics.
Diagramming is used to enhance understanding and identifying the basic social process (BSP) that accounts for most of the variation in the data." (MORSE, 1994, p.39).
A tacit presupposition of such practice is that, somehow, theories have arisen in full-blown form, whereupon they are immediately ready for testing.
It is at the centre of the implementation, analysis, and reporting processes of the qualitative study (Creswell, 2012; Bezuidenhout & van Schalkwyk, 2015).
At this point, rather than general approaches, there are more specific theories and models such as Experiential, Transformational Learning Theories (Kolb,
Anonymisation, which involves meticulously altering personal data to prevent the identification of subjects without additional information, emerges as a crucial tool.
an authorization scheme or a business process structure, can be designed, and may be viewed as artefacts (or part of the IT artefact).
The explosion of digital publication and e-holdings in many libraries, the growing popularity of interdisciplinary and multi-member research projects that can span institutions and even continents, and the noted impact of virtual colonization has had a huge impact on the way we manage information in the process of designing and conducting research.
QDA methodologists and serve as a preliminary guide to novice researchers who wish to explore
To undertake an extensive review of literature before the emergence of a core category violates the basic premise of GT-that being, the theory emerges from the data not from extant theory.
Their versatility allows the development of new strategies in computer-aided qualitative data analysis.
Within this domain, debates over the use of computers in qualitative research are most heated and continue to evoke strong emotions.
(2013) grounded theory of double victimizing also demonstrated usefulness (Charmaz 2014) as it contributes to creating new lines of research, clarifies bullying victim experiences, and reveals that an inner victimizing seems to continue several years after bullying has ended, which has anti-bullying implications.
The widespread adoption of digital technologies made their impact evident in academic research and exploration.
This is a new dimension of thinking in narrowly focused, contextual data analysis and qualitative research methodology.
Apart from the difference in use plan (and related formal rigor required in the make plan), the structure of a software program is more complex than a sequence of computational steps.
Understood as a central feature of scientific realism, AEI method takes the systematic evaluation of mature theories to be essentially a matter of inference to the best explanation, where a theory is accepted when it is judged to provide a better explanation of the evidence than its rivals.
We were just casualties in a war in which everyone was on guard and prepared.
By the 1960s, qualitative research had come under attack by US quantitative sociologists who viewed qualitative inquiry as lacking objectivity, validity, reliability, and replicability (Bryant & Charmaz 2007; Charmaz, 1995, Charmaz 2006).
For example, dry mass, wet mass, energy, description of an activity, the sum of all measures for all elemental mass, and monetary value when measured in input flows must equal the sum of all measures for all the same valuation.
Whatever methodology may be chosen to make an ensuing research scientific has many implicit and explicit problems.
understanding the varied cultural nuances to foster genuine exchanges.
Two recent important papers on the distinction between data and phenomena are Jim Bogan and Jim Woodward, "Saving the Phenomena," Philosophical Review 97, no.
A related misunderstanding of Strauss is his apparent belief that one can effect a break from linear thinking methodology by insisting that the method comes before the problem.
Does it appear some might be presenting a façade rather than going about their business as usual?
Strauss maintains that, because we do not have to prepare an articulated problem in advance of inquiry, researchers may come to their problems at any point in the research process.
Because you choose the next people to talk to or the next cases to find based upon the [theoretical] analysis and you don't waste your time with all sorts of things that have nothing to do with your developing theory'.
The depth and richness of the axioms (statements and rules) depend on the aim behind the ontology development.
First, it feels odd that the code is presented to be there before the program emerges.
Although the situation at the moment would seem to favour those who are more advanced technologically-writing scripts and setting up and operating servers are not within most researchers' range of expertise, creating the demand for future development is crucial, and if prior development patterns are at all predictive, technologies once considered esoteric can become user friendly and mainstream very quickly.
Teaming up with professionals from diverse domains like computer science and mathematics fills the knowledge gap and brings a confluence of perspectives to the research, enriching it manifold.
[12] As I deal with this escalating remodeling of GT to QDA requirements, my hope is to free GT up to be as originally envisioned.
Reduction occurs when the analyst discovers underlying uniformity in the original set of categories or their properties and then reformulates the theory with a smaller set of higher-level concepts.
Starting with this shortlist, in this section we identify IT/IS core artefacts.
Incidents articulated in the data are analyzed and coded, using the constant comparative method, to generate initially substantive, and later theoretical, categories.
If a negative case is identified, the researcher, theoretically, must sample for more negative cases until saturation is reached when synthesis is attained." (MORSE, 1994, p.39) [29]
2 videos of research sites and participants, documents, and other media (e.g., public and private social media posts).
It is important to note that while the specific terminologies may vary, the underlying principles and objectives remain consistent.
Word-processed documents can be saved in a variety of formats, including hypertext markup language (html) and portable document format (pdf) for digital distribution.
Developing research-led teaching: Two cases of practical data reuse in the classroom.
His cheeks turned red and his shoulders slumped as if in defeat.
Toronto: E-Campus Publication http://qualitativeresearchontario.openetext.utoronto.ca/ Government of Canada.
Semantic languages such as RDFS and OWL provide certain constructs that allow ontology developers to translate or map data into the RDF format.
This type of reading allows for more focused and in-depth data analysis.
Contrasting characteristics of five qualitative approaches Characteristics
Further, Holloway and Wheeler (2002) briefly discussed the qualitative research in these words that it allows the researchers to deeply explore behaviours, different perspectives, and life experiences.
Experience (Re-experience) Triple reflection Development plans
[70] 3.16 Analytic rules developed during sorting While theoretical coding establishes the relationship among variables, analytic rules guide the construction of the theory as it emerges.
The journal publishes the original, refereed work of researchers and practitioners twice a year in multimedia electronic format.
by the World-Wide Web Consortium (W3C) such as RDF Schema (RDFS) and Web Ontology Language (OWL) that provide basic elements for the description of ontologies, and linking as far as possible to other existing ontologies.
As explained in an earlier example the class "Flow" defined in the BONSAI ontology is a measure of an entity, hence it is linked to the class "Measure" as defined by the OM2 ontology.
If I ask these questions I have no doubt that main concerns will emerge as well as attempts to continually resolve them.
[6] I wish to remind people, yet again, that classic GT is simply a set of integrated conceptual hypotheses systematically generated to produce an inductive theory about a substantive area.
Respecting the ethical and epistemological issues underpinning qualitative inquiry, engaging in digital research infrastructure should be an optional system to support qualitative inquiry.
Standing out leads to more bullying; Eric: Well, if I said something, if I tried to take some space, Becoming silent; then they would just say, ‘We have to put him down!
Retrieved from http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-107publ56/pdf/PLAW-107publ56.pdf 366
Once the data are in our possession, we try to make them as invulnerable as possible by running our own data servers, anonymising as soon as possible, encrypting everything sensitive and/or taking it offline until needed, and never leaving any content information of any sort on our tablet laptops.
Although quality is crucial in qualitative research, there is, as Corbin states, ‘little consensus about what constitutes an appropriate set of evaluation criteria for qualitative research' (Corbin and Strauss 2015, 341).
The CD included the complete hypertext version of the dissertation, with links to various documents and media elements cited (see Images 1, 2, and 3).
narrative about the stories of an individual's life
Students and researchers new to the method can use our concluding guidelines as a checklist to assess the quality of their constructivist grounded theory research.
Interviewer: The bullying gave you bad self-confidence?
It is a creative process of organizing data so that the analytic scheme will appear obvious." (MAY, 1994, p.10) [20]
Stage 4 - recontextualization, framing, and presenting recommendations based on this.
The program we use is called Dragon Naturally Speaking (DNS), which is generally recognized as one of the top voice recognition programs available.
In these types of interviews, the researcher has better chance to get their opinions, views and experiences in detail.
Goldkuhl, G., Lind, M.: A multi-grounded design research process.
Resource Data Framework Resource Data Framework is a general-purpose language to publish information on the web.
takes time and much coding and analysis to verify a core category through saturation, relevance and workability.
At the type level we talk about DSR artefacts: the model in the form of a design text conforms to a DSR artefact at type level, with make plan, use plan and attributed capacities of the model.
Because some training of the program already will have occurred, accuracy will be high from the start.
Denzin (Ed.), Handbook of qualitative research (pp.
15309290, 2022, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jiec.13220 by Cochrane Uruguay, Wiley Online Library on [18/06/2025].
However, it is important to analyse and interpret experiences through their unique contexts and narratives.
Epistemological stances are, how ever, significant because they shape how researchers gather their data and whether they acknowledge their influence on these data and the subsequent analysis.
The goal is not voluminous description, nor clever verification." (GLASER, 1978, p.93) [13]
Our major foci include: (1) introducing the logic of grounded theory, with emphasis on how research ers can use it to construct theory, (2) detailing criteria for quality in the major forms of grounded theory advocated by Glaser and Strauss and augmented by Glaser, Strauss and Corbin and refined by Corbin, and Charmaz and (3) providing an analysis of how constructivist grounded theorists Thornberg, Halldin, Bolmsjö and Petersson attended to the interviewing process, coding, and developing their theoretical concept of double victimizing.
At this point, qualitative studies come to the fore and this increases the need for practical guides and models for qualitative studies.
Before moving on to the second concrete framework of the model, we first tried to draw a conceptual framework for contextual understanding.
In The Sage handbook of grounded theory, A Bryant and K Charmaz (Eds.), pp.
This highlights the debate and differing opinions among researchers about the role and impact of technology in research.
All these contextual and reflective accounts strengthen the qualitative study in terms of multiple criteria (credibility, confirmability, and transferability).
The final version of the file can then be auto-transcribed using the DNS batch transcription feature.
Ethical concerns may arise within research on sensitive topics where participants may face psychological, social, or legal risks if they can be re-identified through subsequent researchers' use and reconstruction or representation of the data - known in ethics as deductive disclosure.
Within a constructivist grounded theory, Charmaz (2006, 2014) proposes four main criteria for grounded theory studies: credibility, originality, reso nance, and usefulness.
While the multiple case study was published as a traditional, hardcopy volume (Banister, 2001), a CD-ROM appendix was included that gave readers additional data and resources related to the work.
These differences are reflected in the design of the research as well as the analysis, interpretation, and reporting of qualitative data.
This knowledge requires an identification of the meta-artefact but goes beyond
Digital research infrastructure refers to the tools and services used across the research process; four elements of this infrastructure are: 1) a digital network for research and education, 2) data management processes, 3) research software, and 4) advanced computing for managing large amounts of data.
The main elements of the (technical) artefact are rendered in the conceptual model of Fig.
Identifying the contexts in which the experience takes place, with their contextual features: A similar reading and analysis is carried out regarding the contexts in which the experience/ narrative takes place and the features of these contexts.
Achieving accuracy is always worrisome with a QDA methodology.
A researcher requires two essential characteristics for the development of theoretical sensitivity.
Qualitative study enhances the involvement of everyone related to the study.
Early critics of the notion of inference to the best explanation complained that the absence of suitably formulated criteria prevented researchers from making judgments of the best explanation.
While the digital divide among Internet users persists, there is no return to "virtual" research in the old style.
In qualitative research, it is essential to understand the latest digital technologies and skills.
The ontology proposed here is intended for practical application in LCSA.
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
European Journal of Education Studies 3 (9), 369-86.
Comparison of the proposed BONSAI ontology with existing ontologies to structure data for sustainability assessments
Whether the intervention will have the foreseen effect is not guaranteed: what is built is not the system as a whole, but certain elements of it.
In addition, the dataset includes accounts on environmental emissions, waste, use of land and natural resources for each activity.
Copyrights Copyright for this article is retained by the author(s), with first publication rights granted to the journal.
van: Management Research as Design Science: Articulating the Research Products of Mode 2 Knowledge Production in Management.
This requires that the analyst takes whatever amount of quality time that is required to do the discovery process and that he/she learns to take this time in a manner consistent with his/her own temporal nature as an analyst-personal pacing.
Stated more simply, the Internet has fostered, more than any technology before it, the growth of social networks and the realization of an ever-growing number of "global villages" (see McLuhan, 1962, 1964) that represent a diversity of interests among members, and there is ample evidence that there is a growing will among some to control the shape and regulation of these emergent communities (Atchison, 2000; Atchison & Thomas, 2000).
Her subsequent codes: ‘Sequencing: eliciting nostalgia and anticipating regret,' (p.
Yet, even as the horizons expand, challenges persist.
In contrast, as outlined elsewhere (see Palys & Atchison, 2008), the surveys we create typically include both structured/categorical and less structured open-ended questions and are designed using scripting that makes them easily downloadable to SPSS, NVivo, and/or Excel.
Grounded Theory Procedures When not laced and lumped with QDA requirements, GT procedures are fairly simple.
While audio and video formats have been available for decades, only recently have these elements been able to be captured in digital form, making them as easily linkable and transferable as hypertext.
Primary Health Care Research & Development 25(e55): 1-11.
Some researchers working from these positions maintain that data are context-dependent and "cannot be re-used by anyone other than the original researcher" (Jones et al., 2018), and that any attempts to reinterpret the data by other researchers for purposes other than the original project are impossible.
Record where the code takes you and how it is linked to other codes.
It falls upon researchers to harness and navigate these abundant resources.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press
The nature of interpretation in qualitative research.
Qualitative inquiry, and the production, analysis and interpretation of qualitative data, may help to generate new problems and questions, promote the development of theories that explain social processes and behaviours, and may also be used to evaluate policies, practices, and innovations.
We have used the concept of class hierarchy in ontology development.
A (domain) Design Science Research (DSR) artefact is an artefact with a well-described design specification (formal rigor) that is not only directly or indirectly used in a (domain - e.g.
(2009).Doing Research in the Real World (2nd ed.).
They reported that only 13% of the responding programs required a course in qualitative research.
Within the scope of this model, a second framework has been developed in this sense and its details are presented below.
(image, audio, and video), and various interactive and easily accessible digital publishing options (www, CD-ROM, DVD) provide researchers with new and exciting ways to practice their craft.
International Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health and Well-being 1 (3):141-48.
In multiple readings, in the first analysis, two to three main context domains are identified based on the above two considerations (contextual characteristics, the way of relating to the context).
Analysed data of interviews along with the literature will be used to integrate and for the development of conceptual thinking and theory building.
The rectangular class refers to a literal used to define any datatype such as strings or numbers or dates.
This statement is totally wrong for GT, but it addresses the usual QDA quandary of trying to generalize a description of a unit.
At the same time, we think a proper definition should do justice to the intuitions of Gregor and Wieringa and this is one of the challenges for an ontology of artefacts.
The complete electronic journal version of this study is located at http://www.education.uiowa.edu/jrel/spring02/Banister_0108.htm.
Due to the open and exploratory approach, the developed grounded theory showed originality (Charmaz 2014) as it contributes to the literature by offering new insights and proving a fresh conceptualization of victims' experiences and path through school bullying and beyond.
The objective of Semantic Web and LOD is to provide a common framework that allows data to be shared and reused across applications.
Core datasets in EXIOBASE and YSTAFDB were annotated using the ontology and data from these sources can be independently extracted.7,8 This has been studied by addressing the competency questions as discussed above.
The goal is to enhance research collaboration, foster innovation, and leverage the collective expertise of researchers to advance knowledge and address complex challenges.
"With constructivist grounded theory you can't hide": Social justice research and critical inquiry in the public sphere.
the erosion and summarize essential elements of classic GT methodology.
The intended behavior can be, for instance, to run away (in the case of a danger sign).
theoretical elaboration, and (3) judged adequate to its domain with respect to a number of evaluative criteria.
So clearly not every system is an artefact or even an artificial object.
‘Qualitative research is an inquiry process of understanding based on distinct methodological traditions on inquiry that explore a social or human problem.
Rich, multi-relation, multivariate theory is generated through sorting.
We are currently working on a formal presentation of our artefact ontology grounded in UFO.
This functionality is problematic to some degree because the user, once directed to the information, cannot easily return to the body of the manuscript.
The last implication in this direction is the inclusion of the heading ‘Contextuality and Reflexivity' in the methodology section of the report.
The disk contained over 400 pages of text, 36 images, and over an hour of audio and video footage, arranged in an interactive format that allowed users the ability to explore the data and narratives in a variety of ways.
These codes account for more data than other codes, subsume related codes, and raise the analytic level of your work.
Qualitative Research in Digital Era: Innovations, Methodologies and Collaborations Grzegorz Bryda 1, *
Although human language is not a technical object, text is.
White Paper: Building and Supporting the Use of Digital Research Infrastructure Among Qualitative Researchers December 14, 2020
Each of these phases are presented in the following sections.
This may sound trite, but it is just the beginning of many complex issues.
With this, the core concept set of the study is determined; the relationships between variables are visualized, the links between the main structure, components, and dimensions are revealed; the essence of the phenomenon/experience in the phenomenological study is visualized.
However, by the end of the seventh step, it is time to intensify the process of contextual interpretation and reporting on the final outputs/findings.
Thornberg has published numerous empirical articles in a range of peer-reviewed journals and written or co-authored chapters on grounded theory in various method books.
She wants to use GT procedures in service of a QDA forcing approach, which defaults GT.
This is best illustrated in the mentioned below paragraph by (Annells, 1996, p.
Significant theoretical realizations come with growth and maturity in the data, and much of this is outside the analyst's awareness until preconscious processing becomes conscious.
Mann K, MacLeod A (2015) Constructivism: learning theories and approaches to research.
Journal of the Research Center for Educational Technology (RCET) Vol.
What is important is to use the complete package of GT procedures as an integrated methodological whole.
It relates meaningfully and easily with other categories.
Relations of explanatory coherence are established through the operation of seven principles: symmetry, explanation, analogy, data priority, contradiction, competition, and acceptability.
The deconstructive and reconstructive faces of social construc tion: Kenneth Gergen in conversation with César A.
category refers to an interplay and cycling process between external victimiz ing (i.e., a social process of repeated harmful acts directed at the victims that confirmed their victim role among the peers) and internal victimizing (i.e., victims incorporated the victim-image produced by external victimizing at the same time as they tried to develop strategies in order to protect themselves).
Teacher and student interviews, as well as observation footage, is combined with the researcher's narration to tell a story of an exemplary teacher (Video 3).
At this point, experience is prioritized rather than theory, and staying in the experience is predominantly considered during the process.
In essence, we are transitioning from assumptionbased models to data-driven understandings.
Correspondence Agneta Ghose, Danish Center of Environmental Assessment, Department of Planning, Rendsburggade 14, Aalborg University, Aalborg 9000, Denmark.
The interplay between coconstructing rich data, constant comparison, focused coding, theoretical cod ing, memo-writing and theoretical sampling was crucial in order to develop a set of conceptual categories anchored in the data.
Collaboratively cultivating and harnessing digital potential has become a hallmark of modern qualitative research methodology and data analysis.
Other popular commercial and open source voice recognition software applications include IBM ViaVoice, MacSpeech, Microsoft Windows Speech Recognition, Philips SpeechMagic, Sphinx, and VoxForge.
Conventional sources of data include information published in scientific publications, relevant data repositories, national/international statistics, intergovernmental organizations including UN agencies and non-governmental organizations (Cooper et al., 2013).
This means researchers must explicate their taken-for-granted assumptions, which requires gaining ‘methodological self-consciousness' (Charmaz 2017) of how hidden beliefs can enter the research process.
With this, the qualitative study will become stronger in terms of multiple criteria (credibility, confirmability, and authenticity).
Narrative: The primary researcher can write a short story/ narrative about their experience, taking into account the diary they kept during the research process and their narrative and reflective writings, reflecting the context of the field, institution and society in which the experience took place.
From a constructivist view of grounded theory, Charmaz (2006, 2014) contrasts such definitions of theory with interpretive definitions of theory, in which theory ‘emphasizes interpretation and gives abstract understanding greater priority than explanation' (Charmaz 2014, 230).
Coding is at the core of qualitative analysis, but its effectiveness depends on the size of the volume of data we have.
TA B L E 3 Competency questions (and their corresponding SPARQL queries) used to evaluate the ontology with respect to the datasets converted used for data annotation to RDF
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Ethics Special Working Committee.
Ann: I felt that there had to be something very wrong with me because everyone picked on me.
PROBLEM FORMULATION According to the AEI theory of scientific method, the selection and formulation of problems are of central importance to scientific research.
It also CONTACT Robert Thornberg robert.thornberg@liu.se Linköping University, Linköping SE-58183, Sweden
The work of the second author is funded by national funds through FCT-Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (Portugal), under the Scientific Employment Stimulus-Institutional Call-[CDL-CTTRI-248-SGRH/2022] and the CIDTFF (projects UIDB/00194/2020 and UIDP/00194/2020).
Constructs defined using these ontologies help to define relationships to link distinct knowledge organization systems (Holland & Culture, 2010).
EXIOBASE is a multi-regional input-output (MRIO) model that includes supply and use tables for 44 countries, 5 Rest of World regions, 200 products, and 164 industries/activities in each geographical area (EXIOBASE Consortium, 2014; Merciai & Schmidt, 2018).
Participants should be motivated to share their experiences of the phenomenon but not the specific individual supervisors or organisations.
Variations in data structure of common datasets used for sustainability adds to this challenge.
A digital bundle: Protecting and promoting indigenous knowledge online.
In this way, the qualitative study is strengthened in terms of many criteria (confirmability and transferability).
Expanding the hypertext environment to include full-text transcriptions allows readers to visit the complete context of an interview or observation experience.
Data analysis and presentation processes for different qualitative research approaches (narrative, phenomenology, grounded theory, ethnography, and case study) are described in detail, taking into account the characteristics of the approaches (Ajjawi Higgs, 2007; Creswell, 2012; Creswell, 2013; Cleland & Durning, 2015).
Journal of the Research Center for Educational Technology (RCET) Vol.
In this approach the aim is to construct a theory that is grounded in the data (Glaser, 1978, 1992; Glaser &
Psychologists have made enormous contributions in these areas, and many of them use grounded theory (see, for example, Ayón et al.
The concept is illustrated only when it is first introduced to develop the imagery of its meaning.
In the course of critiquing this prevailing dogmatic approach to theory testing, Glaser and Strauss have provided us with a much broader conception of what social science investigators could and should do with their research time.
SELECT ?FlowObject (xsd:string(?value) as ?value) ?unit FROM <Specify IRI of dataset, See query 1> WHERE { { ?flow a bont:Flow .
Researchers in the United States, for example, need to understand how the USA PATRIOT Act (2001) has undermined researchers' ability to protect confidential, sensitive information unless they are in possession of a Confidentiality Certificate (through the National Institutes of Health) or Privacy Certificate (through the National Institute of Justice).
Halldin, Bolmsjö and Petersson, who conducted all the interviews, were instructed and trained in qualitative interviewing.
WYSIWYS (what you see is what you get) html editing programs such as CoffeeCup, FirstPage, Front Page, GoLive, HotDog, and Dreamweaver 361
NVivo 2.0 and ATLAS.ti 5.0: A comparative review of two popular qualitative data-analysis programs.
‘A constructivist grounded theory distinguishes between the real and the true.
Formal theory is generated by many such diverse area comparisons done in a concerted way to generate a formal theory of cultivating for recreation, profit, client building, help, donations etc.
While interviews are the most popular, GT works with any data-"all is data"-not just one specific data.
However, because e-readers are able to compare media elements with full-text observation and interview transcriptions, greater assurances of accuracy of context and interpretation are available.
Gray (2009) argued that deductive reasoning moves towards hypothesis testing to verify, refuse or modify a theory based on empirical data, whereas inductive reasoning seeks to discover a binding principle and to construct generalizations, relationships and even theories by analysing the data collected for this purpose.
We aim to spotlight five pivotal areas in qualitative research that technological advancements have profoundly influenced.
This term encapsulates modern societies' transformative shifts as they embrace and integrate information and communication technologies across daily life, including home, work, education, and leisure.
Another example can be an environment model that intelligent agents use for internal reasoning.
This evolution could be called path-creation design.
Even to insist that research problems are an integral part of method will not overcome the straightjacketing of linear thinking; for one could still assert that problems are integral to method, but that they constitute the essential first step in a temporal sequence of research activities.
Glaser and Strauss's (1965, 1968) studies were based on extensive field research in multiple sites.
The reason given for the distinction is that software can be updated, so can have different codes at different times, while a code becomes different by each change (the paper talks about a change in the syntactic structure that includes variable renaming and inclusion of a comment, so apparently any change apart from layout).
Glaser's version and Strauss and Corbin's Version have also been discussed.
[30] MORSE continues: "Theorizing follows from the processes of theoretical sampling.
The query results in the label of the FlowObject "Copper products" which is the determining flow of the Activity "Copper production"
As Lindgren (2022) notes, digital innovations are reshaping our societal structures, economic dynamics, and cultural landscapes at an unprecedented pace and magnitude.
(a) Ethnography study on the healthcare and clinical education experiences of the surgical team.
There always is a main concern and there always is a prime mover.
How comfortable do the participants seem in the presence of the researcher?
studied as collections of different social and cultural data, a space for communication and interactivity, which can revolutionise our understanding of collective human behaviour (Rogers 2009).
In establishing that data are reliable evidence for the existence of phenomena, we control variously for confounding factors (experimentally and statistically), carry out replications, calibrate instruments, empirically investigate equipment, and perform statistical analyses for data reduction purposes.
She reported that her students were challenged by exploring and analyzing the data contained on the disk.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 1(3), 1-22.
The single computer-assisted on-line interview (CAOI) that was conducted in Atchison's sex-client project was perhaps the most challenging and time-consuming of all the interviews.
In a descriptive literature review conducted by Yang and Tate (2012), they explored the field of cloud computing research and proposed a classification structure.
15309290, 2022, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jiec.13220 by Cochrane Uruguay, Wiley Online Library on [18/06/2025].
Qualitative research is an interpretive and naturalistic approach (Guba& Lincoln, 1994).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Once sorting on the core variable begins, the constant comparisons are likely to generate many new ideas, especially on theoretical codes for integrating the theory.
Further, to refine the construct and to answer the research questions, the researchers have to get data and analyse it and then again and again repeat this process until and unless new data stop emerging or the data saturation occurred (Glaser & Strauss, 1967) and the grounded theory approach is an appropriate way to study human behaviour on a sensitive topic even in a different cultural context (Wolcott, 1980).
Another dozen people in the department decided to invest in personal leases or outright purchases, but none of those funds came from the university administration or computing services.
In reflectivity, it is important to start from a concrete experience and return to it.
Participants often commented at the end of the session how enjoyable the conversation was and how much they appreciated being able to talk so openly and freely.
It is a reflection on experience and the context in which the experience takes place rather than a reflection on thought as in philosophy.
For instance, the realm of collaborative technologies or the intricacies of database systems often remains enigmatic for many qualitative researchers.
In our view, the IT and IM perspective complement each other.
[47] 3.6 Open coding It is in the beginning with open coding-and a minimum of preconception-that the analyst is most tested as to his trust in himself and in the grounded method, his skill to use the method and his ability to generate codes and find relevance.
Video use in social science research and program evaluation.
In this regard, identifications are made and codes are created.
Grounded Theory Procedures 3.1 Theoretical sensitivity 3.2 Getting started 3.3 All is data 3.4 Use of the literature 3.5 Theoretical coding 3.6 Open coding 3.7 Theoretical sampling 3.8 Constant comparative method 3.9 Core variable 3.10 Selective coding 3.11 Delimiting 3.12 Interchangeability of indicators 3.13 Pacing 3.14 Memoing 3.15 Sorting and writing up 3.16 Analytic rules developed during sorting 4.
However, if the Information System is conceived as including humans, then the system is not the output of intentional design.
Beyond that, however, we find more in the way of what we consider misunderstanding about the Internet.
The discussion/comment section in the report is written through such an effort of understanding and interpretation.
Yet, these databases are published in different file formats (e.g., csv, xslx, xml) and also using different notations, terminologies, and schemas (Pauliuk et al., 2016), which prevents them from being interoperable immediately after publication.
Moreover, they contended that studies of direct experience could be conducted with rigor.
(Creswell, 2013; Bleakley & Cleland, 2015; Fenwick & Nimmo, 2015; Mann & MacLeod, 2015; Nardon & Amrita, 2021).
This contains 100,000+ data records on anthropogenic cycles of 62 elements as well as specific engineering materials such as stainless steel.
Based on the analysis, the manager of the organization can make decisions that influence the system, for instance, by introducing an IT system.
Specifies the dimension (Quantity) of a Measure that is classified as a BalanceableProperty
These discussions share roots with Postmodernism, acknowledging the media's profound influence on identity, culture, and societal structures.
Journal of Research for Educational Leaders, 1(2), 44-65.
(ii) Conversion of heterogeneous open datasets used for sustainability assessments into machine-readable format.
SELECT DISTINCT ?FlowObject ?unitLabel FROM <Specify IRI of dataset, See query 1> WHERE { ?x a bont:FlowObject; rdfs:label ?FlowObject .
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).
When brought into QDA, GT abstraction is neglected in favor of accuracy of description-the dominant concern of QDA methodology-and GT acquires the QDA problem of worrisome accuracy-an irrelevant concern in GT.
Our advice included the suggestion that the interviews should be conducted in the actual store using wireless microphones while wandering about the venue.
I felt worthless, that no one globally disliked; would like to be with me.
GT seeks comparative incidents by theoretical sampling.
Thereafter, only the concept is used, not the illustration.
Alter, S.: The concept of ‘IT artifact' has outlived its usefulness and should be retired now.
F I G U R E 2 Diagrammatic examples of using ontological and instance level interoperability.
Teacher-Student Interactions in a Ubiquitous Computing Environment: Learning within Dyads & Triads of Interaction Karyn Bobkoff Katz and Annette Kratcoski
It has clear and grabbing implications for formal theory.
Kitchin underscored the profound implications of these evolving methodologies on the world of science (Kitchin 2014a, 2014b).
In this step, again independently by two researchers, the prominent experiences/narratives in the text are marked (fragmented, underlined, coloured, classified, and labelled), along with their main points/ emphases and the contextual features in which the experience takes place, in line with the (reorganized) research problems.
Generally speaking, statistical methods are of direct help in the detection of phenomena, but not in the construction of explanatory theories.
These are: Never get involved in long explanations of the study; use the standard explanation provided by the supervisor.
International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 5(3), 193-197.
This allows the researcher to pare down the original list of categories for collecting and coding data, according to the present boundaries of the theory.
Therefore, their actions and behaviours are unpredictable.
It also emphasizes staying in the experience and narrative and returning to the narrative again and again, while also seeing existing theories as an important component of the process of understanding.
And one does not even need to be a qualitative 353
A substantial amount of time, equipment, expertise, and technical support will be required to complete a strong study (Rogers, 2000).
The term is confus ing because it is often mistaken for representative population sampling in quantitative research.
I would like to thank my doctoral students Merve Saraçoğlu and Selçuk Akturan for their hard work in this process.
Bruner J (1991) The narrative construction of reality.
Glaser and Strauss rejected this view and democratized qualitative inquiry.
Replication is a concept and value associated with postpositivist, quantitative research wherein the push toward open science and having access to data is seen as valuable to enable others to verify the analyses and findings of published research (Asendorpf, 2013; Nosek, Spies, & Motyl, 2012).
Since at least "Doc's" legendary introduction of William Foote Whyte (1943) to the street corner boys, network sampling techniques have, until now, relied on some form of face-to-face contact between the researcher and at least one participant or informant who agrees to vouch for or go forward on behalf of the researcher to recruit members of their social network for participation (e.g., see Lofland, Snow, Anderson, & Lofland, 2006).
Lumping GT in as a QDA methodology simply does not apply and, indeed, blocks good GT while the default remodeling of GT into another QDA rages on.
Later modifications are mainly on the order of clarifying the logic, taking out non-relevant properties, integrating elaborating details of properties into the major outline of interrelated categories and-most important- reduction.
While others have already considered the many research sites and opportunities that are now available to researchers through the development and proliferation of the Internet (e.g., Atchison, 1999; Bainbridge, 1999; Bauman, Airey, & Atak, 1998; Couper, Traugott, & Lamias, 2001; Palys & Atchison, 2008), little attention has been paid to what digital technologies and the world's developing digital infrastructure can offer qualitative researchers in the actual process of doing research.
Journal of the Research Center for Educational Technology (RCET) Vol.
Nonetheless, it does not pursue to approve or negate the existing theories, but endeavours to create outlines, stabilities and significances by collecting data (Gray, 2009).
Qualitative researchers are now at that similar ground level of digital development and are thus in a position to promote and influence its development.
We end with some practical implications for design research.
This journey is best explained by the (Strauss & Corbin, 1998, p.
To say that a given theory is an interpretation - and therefore fallible - is not at all to deny that judgments can be made about the soundness or probably usefulness of it' 227
This allows the freedom to combine economic and environmental information in a common computational structure, facilitating data exchange and reuse between different academic fields with different definitions of, for example, biosphere (Weidema et al., 2018).
While this is an extended label, it does serve the useful purpose of suggesting that the theory of scientific method is centrally concerned with generating theories abductively and appraising them in terms of what philosophers have come to call inference to the best explanation.
These can mirror the sorts of processes that effective interviewers would use (e.g., see Palys & Atchison, 2008).
Practically, it may well result in the researcher spending valuable time on an area of literature that proves to be of little significance to the resultant GT.
FORUM: QUALITATIVE SOCIAL RESEARCH SOZIALFORSCHUNG
This rule forces focus, selectivity and delimiting of the analysis.
In conclusion, the emergence of novel information and communication technologies has enhanced networking capacities and revolutionised collaborative work in qualitative research and computer data analysis.
Grounded the orists achieve theoretical saturation, when they seek more data while theore tical sampling, but find no new properties or characteristics of their categories.
interpretation, and reporting processes are framed as narrative, contextual, and reflective processes.
Hence, a qualitative research approach is used in these types of studies.
I have detailed these matters in my books "Theoretical Sensitivity" (GLASER, 1978), "Basics of Grounded Theory Analysis" (GLASER, 1992), "Doing Grounded Theory" (GLASER, 1998a), and "The Grounded Theory Perspective" (GLASER, 2001).
Given the potentially sensitive nature of the topic for employees and the fact that the researcher would be discussing issues that may raise some painful memories for the participants, the researcher should identify support or other information services in advance that individuals can access in their area should they feel the need to after conversation, and should provide these details to each participant.
To support qualitative researchers in making use of the digital research infrastructure in Canada, it is imperative to provide training on these issues.
After barely handing over the barcode, she hurriedly picked up her belongings.
Inhibiting the social presence of self; Believing Eric: For example, by not putting my hand up during the social invisibility prevents bullying; Inaction lessons, being quiet and not standing out.
Echoing sociological criticisms of qualitative studies in the 1960s, Rubin et al.'s respondents stated that "qualitative research was either imagined to be or believed to be ‘inaccurate,' ‘subjective,' and ‘lacking rigor' (p.
Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark
Glaser and Strauss and Corbin have moved the method in somewhat conflicting directions (Glaser, 1992; Strauss, 1987; Strauss & Corbin, 1990, 1994, 1998).
As science aims at abstract knowledge, not knowledge of the particular, the DSR artefact should generalize over multiple use contexts.
Digital Data in Qualitative Research: Strengthening the Visibility and Credibility of Portraiture Savilla Banister and Dodi Hodges
Qualitative Methods in Health and Health Services Research.
Reaching wider audiences with qualitative research findings increases the likelihood that those findings will have an impact on the improvement of educational systems and classrooms.
This technological era has emphasised the pivotal role of interdisciplinary collaboration, particularly between IT and qualitative research.
When GT procedures are laced with the exhaustive, abundant requirements of QDA methodology, GT becomes distorted, wasting large amounts of precious research time and derailing the knowledge- hence grounding-of GT as to what is really going on.
Second-level codes are used to identify significant portions of the text and compile these excerpts into categories.
Note that in the original grounded theory (Glaser and Strauss 1967), Glaserian grounded theory (Glaser 1978, 1998) and Straussian grounded theory (Strauss and Corbin 1990, 1998), explanatory power (i.e., the power to explain and predict) is a significant quality criterion of the constructed theory.
Conclusion We have attempted in this article to outline some of the benefits we have realized in our research by crossing the digital divide and asking what exists and can be constructed to facilitate qualitative and mixed methods field research.
The importance of sampling in any type of research is highlighted by Punch (1998, p.
Hyperlinking all of this information allows for non-linear exploration and analysis of ideas presented in the narrative.
All may help to alleviate the potential risks of collaborative analysis and research.
Gladstone, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto; Director, Centre for Critical Qualitative Health Research Cara Krmpotich, Faculty of Information, University of Toronto; Co-Director of the Great Lakes Research Alliance Meghan McDonough, Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Calgary Brett Smith, Durham University (UK), and on behalf of the International Society of Qualitative Research in Sport and Exercise
We posit a form event behind any artefact instance, alternatively called making, producing, assembling, reproducing.
As the framework and use of sustainability assessment tools expands, the availability, variety, and the volume of data in use also increases.
In this way, you are building quality into your study.
Qualitative Research Method: Grounded Theory Shahid N Khan1 1
Available from: http:// ctri.nic.in/Clinicaltrials/cont1.php.
The rounded rectangles refer to the metadata related to the datapoint.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)
The two core concerns to draw attention to in this paper are the epistemological issues and ethical issues related to qualitative inquiry; a discussion of these issues is necessary as they precede the challenges that many researchers face when considering whether and how to engage with digital research infrastructure.
Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE Publications, Inc.
By following up on codes in the early interviews, the grounded theorists develop more pointed questions and ask about areas that they had not anticipated would be important.
Existing LCA ontologies define the key elements of life cycle inventory and LCA data.
See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
CAQDAS and other new digital tools illustrate how technology can bolster the research process, offering time efficiency and adding substantial depth to qualitative work.
While grounded theorists are coding, they write memos about their codes and the questions they have about them.
LCA is a widely used sustainability assessment tool and provides the conceptual framework for LCSA (Troullaki et al., 2021).
Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory
Utilizing computer data analysis, mainly via NLP tools, ensures that qualitative research is conducted more systematically and comprehensively.
The account of problems that boasts these twin virtues is the constraint-composition theory.3 Briefly stated, the constraint-composition theory asserts that a problem comprises all the constraints on its solution, along with the demand that the solution be found.
Digitality is pivotal for advancing the contemporary qualitative research methodology and CAQDAS.
http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0114-fqs0801204 .
The brief training process trains both the researcher and the program-the researcher to speak in a manner that is most recognizable to the program and the program to recognize the researcher's unique speech-and is remarkably accurate once trained.
In the genre of portraiture, visual and auditory data truly enhance the presentation of the phenomenon portrayed.
This is further explained by Denzin and Lincoln (2003, p.
All subjects, predicates, and objects are each identified by an Internationalized Resource Identifier (IRI) which is similar to a Universal Resource Locater (URL) or a web address, hence aiding the discoverability of individual datapoints.
This design takes place in the conversation between system designer and user (that is why the graphical representation is useful) and the ER model is the make plan of the IT application.
Geographical location includes points, lines, and spatial regions, such as cities or countries.
For example, the focused code ‘self-inhibiting' had its roots in initial codes like ‘trying to not stand out', ‘becoming passive out of social fear', ‘keeping oneself down', ‘believing social invisibility prevents bullying', ‘inhi biting the social presence of self', and ‘becoming silent'.
While the criteria used in quantitative research are ‘internal and external validity', ‘reliability', and ‘objectivity', the evaluation of qualitative research is based on different ones such as ‘credibility', ‘transferability', ‘dependability', ‘confirmability', and
Contextual reflective practice with triple reflection.
Our specialist told him in a gentle tone that varicocele should be excluded first in male infertility and told him to go to the next room, take off his clothes and wait for us.
Whether overlooking the available software or an inability to fathom the collaborative potential of these tools, the root cause often traces back to a fundamental unfamiliarity and lack of expertise with these digital resources.
Indeed, I believe that, suitably reconstructed, grounded theory offers us an attractive conception of scientific method.
The Practice of Nursing Research: Appraisal, Synthesis, and Generation of Evidence.
The researchers have defined different criteria for quantitative and qualitative research but the common thing is that it depends upon the population characteristics, types of data and its accuracy likes its degree of confidence.
Digital Data in Qualitative Research: Strengthening the Visibility and Credibility of Portraiture
This format provides the e-reader with a rich, three-dimensional experience.
Virtually every web-based survey we have seen has involved little more than taking what would have been on a white piece of paper and placing it on a screen.
However, at the same time, in these processes, which should be carried out with a reflective approach, the conceptual framework and research problems are repeatedly reviewed and reorganized/improved with the experiences and outputs.
In their constructivist grounded theory study, Thornberg et al.
It is a process of conjecture and verification, of correction and modification, of suggestion and defense.
This essay contends that becoming proficient in qualitative research methodologies and computer-assisted data analysis is closely linked to grasping and applying new digital technologies and enhancing digital skills.
They have an active role in the study and can voice their individual benefits and harms of the study.
When the young couple returned, we weren't really there.
Provides the label and total amount of products (FlowObject) required to produce Cattle in Australia
163) defined the grounded theory approach very briefly in these words as...
Defending research confidentiality "to the extent the law allows": Lessons from the Boston College subpoenas.
The uniformity and the conditions become generated concepts and hypotheses.
The adequate theoretical sampling is important for development of diverse and wide range of theory while, inadequate theoretical sampling can lead the theory development process towards weak, thin and not well integrated base of theory (Glaser & Strauss, 1967).
[54] 3.10 Selective coding Selective coding means to cease open coding and to delimit coding to only those variables that relate to the core variable in sufficiently significant ways as to produce a parsimonious theory.
In particular, journal articles are encouraged to include video and sound files as reference or evidence, links to data, illustrative animations, photographs, etc.
In general, it is possible to summarize the process through the six steps defined by Creswell: preparing and organizing the data for analysis; initial exploration of the data through the process of coding it; developing a more general picture of the data (descriptions and constructing themes); representing the findings; interpreting and reporting the findings; and validating the accuracy of findings (member validation/checking, external audit, expert opinions/panel, and data and theoretical triangulation).
This is strictly routine, preconceived QDA descriptive capture, not GT.
We call these the use input and use output of the artefact, to avoid confusion with the make input and make output in the make plan.
Retrieved from http://books.google.com.au/books?id=y16ww5ZsJ0AC&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false Strauss, A., & Corbin, J.
Glaser and Strauss proposed that (1) research questions had to arise from studying empirical situations, (2) deduc tive hypothesis testing undermined developing new theoretical approaches, and (3) thus, reduced the quality, relevance and usefulness of the research products.
Next, the equipment needed to collect the data, in the various formats, must be secured.
Introduction In the modern era, technological advancements have dramatically transformed research and data analysis within the realm of social sciences.
In this step, the text is generally read from beginning to end and first impressions, thoughts, feelings, and questions are noted.
His voice got lower and lower and avoiding eye contact, he said that he had returned from the army 2 years ago, that he and his wife were trying to have a child, that they first went to a gynecologist and had her checked.
Since then, qualitative research is used in other research fields as well.
The make plan is not a complete manufacturing plan.
Can they account for these data, or is something else going on?
It is "scientized" up, down and sideways in QDA methodologies catching up GT analysis in its © 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
While reliability http://www.ed.uiuc.edu/EPS/PES-Yearbook/95_docs/haig.html (4 of 11)8/4/2006 9:04:24 AM
Once the ontology was finalized, we proceeded to extract and annotate data from publicly available open datasets in order to link the dataset to the Semantic Web following our ontology and then to validate it.
Instead, GT methodology treats the literature as another source of data to be integrated into the constant comparative analysis process once the core category, its properties and related categories have emerged and the basic conceptual development is well underway.
Neither of them had looked at us at all since they entered.
Schinke (Eds.), The Routledge international encyclopedia of sport and exercise psychology (vol.1: Theoretical and methodological concepts).
Phenomena are relatively stable, recurrent general features of the world that we seek to explain.
The present work provides the foundation necessary to enhance the use of Semantic Web with respect to sustainability assessments.
Every individual perceives the world differently and views it in different contexts.
At a time when it is fashionable to espouse anti-realist perspectives on educational and scientific research generally, a commitment to scientific realist methodology might seem an unfair burden to place on grounded theory.
Social research methods: qualitative and quantitative approaches.
Again, if necessary, the research team can come together to create a separate conceptual framework for each main context.
Most research on human interaction has been based on selected data relating to thematically focused case studies.
This model emerged during the analysis processes of two narrative-designed qualitative studies that I supervised within the scope of the Doctoral Program in Medical Education.
We see this research as providing a chance for people who have paid for sex to be included in discussions that they have been excluded from for far too long-without having to fear that their safety, privacy, confidentiality or anonymity will be compromised in any way.
Issues in collection of audio, images and video for digital environments must be addressed; good quality in capturing these elements initially will insure quality in the final products.
Journal of Workplace Behavioral Health 30 (3), 287-305.
Beyond tools, the digital era introduces new paradigms of managing information.
The purpose of narrative writing here is to help the reader visualize the sample 1-2 experiences (re-experiencing) through re-contextualization and reframing.
Will other forms of appendices be included that are digital in nature?
We do not need a special category of socio-technical artefacts.
The objective of this study is to enable the integration and extraction of open access data relevant to sustainability assessments with the Semantic Web.
His current research is on school bullying, especially with a focus on social and moral processes involved in bullying, bystander rationales, reactions and actions, and students' perspectives, experiences and expla nations.
A case in point is the recent COVID pandemic, which, as noted by Wa-Mbaleka and Costa (2020), compelled qualitative researchers to pivot from traditional in-person methods like focus groups and interviews to online platforms.
Specifies the Measure of a Flow when this Measure is a BalanceableProperty, that is, when it follows a conservation law
Design Science Research [16] has grown in popularity in the Information Systems field.
These innovations enable researchers to explore previously uncharted territories, producing more comprehensive and reflective findings.
[62] The basic goal of memoing is to develop ideas on categories with complete freedom into a memo fund that is highly sort-able.
Examples given are sorting algorithm, data mining algorithm, and protocol.
Digitality can be defined as the experience of living within a digital culture.
In the design of qualitative studies described above, two components are critical: establishing the conceptual framework and identifying the research problems.
This becomes an extremely time-consuming and expensive task in any larger scale study.
The information artefact is the disk or paper itself - viewed purely physically, that is used to bear information.
in the latter half of the twentieth century (Brent and Anderson 1990; Fielding and Lee 1991).
The conceptual framework of environmental LCA, which has traditionally focused on a limited number of ecosystem and health impacts, has been adapted to include the economic and social costs of production and consumption demand for products and processes (Guinée, 2016; Sala, 2020).
This is immediately useful for literature review and proposal writing, and continues through the research design, data gathering, and analysis stages- where NVivo's flexibility for many different sources of data (including audio, video, graphic, and text) are well known-of writing for publication.
In the digital age, a researcher is not merely expected to possess expertise in data analysis methodologies or field experience; their skillset now must encompass database management and even touch upon programming.
A functional property is a property that can determine that the predicate can link an IRI of an instance to only one other (unique) IRI of an instance.
The breadth of contemporary approaches to qualitative data analysis can seem daunting even to experienced social scientists or researchers, especially as they move from the general analytic strategies used in qualitative research to more specific approaches for different types of qualitative data, including interviews, text, sounds, images, videos, and so-called virtual data.
This article introduces grounded theory and places this method in its historical context when 1960s quantitative researchers wielded harsh criticisms of qualitative research.
This constant influx of data derived from numerous digital sources challenges traditional methodologies and beckons for novel approaches to qualitative inquiry.
And, because our most important research problems will be decidedly ill-structured, we can say that the basic task of scientific inquiry is to better structure our research problems by building in the various required constraints as our research proceeds.
These predicates have inverse property, that is, <A> skos:narrower <B>.
Seedless bananas [33] are not technical objects, but there is a design for them, so "the seedless banana" is a non-technical artefact.
Unlike earlier manuals describing how to do grounded theory, con temporary versions of the method including Bryant (2017, 2019), Charmaz (2006, 2014), Corbin and Strauss (2008, 2015), and Thornberg and Charmaz (2014) take a flexible approach to grounded theory and adopt more recent epistemologies.
This new age of qualitative research underscores the unique challenges and opportunities, emphasizing the imperative for collaborative strategies.
Checklists for improving rigour in qualitative research: A case of the tail wagging the dog?
With GT, the outline for writing is simply an emergent product of the sorting of memos.
The finalized ontology defines all the concepts of LCSA in the form of triples (see Figure 1).
Will cumulative records, such as full transcriptions, be included?
Seide reported that ‘For a young woman, the word resilient was patronizing and seemed to normalize structural vio lence as it is surprising to some that more Haitians are not ‘losing their shit' from being tested and challenged by their everyday lives'.
They highlight a departure from traditional analogue critical theories in that audiences can produce new texts that support the actions of other participants rather than just their idiolect, implying that in the digital age, everyone has the potential to be a creator or influencer.
Mary MacKay, Wake County Public School System Theresa Minick, Kent State University Jason Schenker, Kent State University Chris Simonavice, Murray State University Karen Swan, Kent State University Mark van 't Hooft, Kent State University Maggie Veres, Wright State Universit Yin Zhang, Kent State University
Other researchers may need to take even greater care, depending on the sensitivity of the information they have and the potential consequences to their participants, and whatever unique legal constraints or enhancements exist for protecting research confidentiality.
168-169) acciden tally discovered the plight of black adopted daughters, filhas de criação, in white families.
However, we do agree that code and program must be distinguished, and also that a program can be distinguished from a software system (where the former has an effect in the computer internally and the latter externally, in the interface).
This concept is about a certain kind of animals [8] but this is a property of natural language, not of the signs as such.
Grounded theory offers a useful way of studying processes.
As a distinguishing item of GT, however, it is barely a beginning, leaving the reader with no knowledge of how generating is done, because the assumption is that it is done by routine QDA.
This forces the analyst into confronting similarities, differences and degrees in consistency of meaning between incidents (indicators), generating an underlying uniformity which in turn results in a coded category and the beginnings of properties of it.
Although Internet-based surveys have become more common, we have yet to see anyone making creative use of the advantages that computer-based techniques bestow.
As the backbone of digital qualitative research, CAQDAS symbolises the seamless marriage of technology with traditional research methodologies, ensuring precise and streamlined outcomes.
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
In this study, we used the hybrid version of EXIOBASE version 3.7.17 which contains the MRIO model from 2011.
We were somehow invisible in this event in which our presence was the protagonist.
All versions of EXIOBASE can be downloaded from the official website (Exiobase Consortium, 2014).
Work focused AND Blindness to the human situation, emotions, and culture Both for patients, their relatives, and for physicians and learners Inhumane environment (physical, social)
(2) Learn everything you can about the type of qualitative inquiry you adopt, whether it's narrative inquiry, discourse analysis, or a version of grounded theory.
The second is a description of the team conducting the research.
[57] 3.12 Interchangeability of indicators GT is based on a concept-indicator model of constant comparisons of incidents (indicators) to incidents (indicators) and, once a conceptual code is generated, of incidents (indicators) to emerging concept.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)
Earlier studies that have developed ontologies for LCSA mentioned the "potential" of Semantic Web to overcome data integration challenges (Hertwich et al., 2018; Kuczenski et al., 2016; Pauliuk et al., 2016).
main IS artefacts and their interrelationships in Section 4, compare the results with the existing literature and discusses practical implications for DSR researchers.
SPARQL query Check BONSAI SPARQL endpoint (http://odas.aau.dk) for complete list of queries and live results PREFIX bont: http://ontology.bonsai.uno/core# PREFIX rdfs: http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema# PREFIX om2: http://www.ontology-of-units-of-measure.org/resource/om-2/ PREFIX btime: http://rdf.bonsai.uno/time# PREFIX prov: http://www.w3.org/ns/prov#
the conditions under which variation can be found built into the study and explained?
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)
The instance level interoperability was initially done manually and further linked using the SKOS ontology.
The more recent dawn of social networking and content sharing websites such as Facebook, Pinterest, and personal blogs, "notification" technologies such as Twitter, and the explosion in popularity of short message services (SMS), or text messaging, has resulted in yet another transformation in the ongoing process of virtual colonization.
What are the emotional experiences of team members during clinical practice and training processes in the surgical clinic?
The criterion of consilience, which Thagard believes is the most important for choosing the best explanation, captures the idea that a theory is more explanatorily coherent than its rivals if it explains a greater range of facts.
(2018) studied ontology development for sustainability assessment and recommended improving the linking of the semantic databases and existing ontologies to benefit from access to up-to-date information in these repositories.
The epistemological perspective is concerned with the way knowledge is acquired.
We shall see shortly that questions to do with the appropriateness of the analogies invoked in our modeling enter into the business of theory appraisal.
Through reflective/narrative writings and the researcher's diary, the researcher writes their own narratives about the implementation and data analysis processes and their reflections on their experiences.
However, their books came across as rigid and prescriptive in sharp contrast to the open-ended, fluid approach of Strauss's (1959) earlier work, and evident in the Discovery book.2 Strauss and Corbin's manuals also diverged from Glaser's (1978) elaboration of the method, to Glaser's (1992) furious response and avowals to have the only ‘classic' grounded theory method.
In social science, two terminologies relate to this turn: Social Science Computing (SSC) and Computational Social Science (CSS).
Furthermore, we have argued for a holistic view, that is, to see artefacts always in context of the artefact network.
For Glaser and Strauss, theorizing-and creating high quality research-needed to be predicated on direct knowledge of the studied phenomenon.
3.14 Memoing Theory articulation is facilitated through an extensive and systematic process of memoing that parallels the data analysis process in GT.
The Importance of Researcher's Digital Skills We can access various innovative tools and methodologies in today's digital age.
Wieringa [37:10] uses the term "middle-range generalization".
As the woman was rummaging through her purse, she dropped her wallet on the floor and her belongings scattered on the floor.
Concerns about objectivity, validity, reliability and replicability in qualita tive research still pervade academic psychology.
Winter, R.: Design Science Research in Europe European.
Example: List the FlowObjects in the YSTAFDB dataset and the corresponding units.
For instance, mathematical objects and social entities are endurants but not physical objects.
Storing qualitative data, methods, and materials can also support the sharing of data which can (in some cases) be used for secondary analyses with the goal of producing new
The integration of qualitative research into intervention studies is a research strategy that is gaining increased attention across disciplines.
Included in the latter are research ethics boards who often lack expertise in issues that arise in computer-assisted research, hardware/software costs and technological expertise for researchers, and university administrations who have not embraced infrastructure for qualitative research to the same extent they have supported quantitative research.
The researcher begins to see the kind of categories that can handle the data theoretically, so that he/she knows how to code all data, ensuring the emergent theory fits and works.
For instance, in the case of software design, one text object could be an object model.
‘The units, cases, or parts of social life that are under consideration.
When in some culture, pebbles are recognized as decent doorstops, then "pebble" is a variant of the doorstop artefact and a pebble individual adapted and used in this way can be said to conform to this artefact.
Nonetheless, this point does not excuse having very small samples (cf., Thomson 2011).
The strategy proved to be quite successful, producing 21.6% of his participants for a web-based survey (n=174) and 16% (n=4) of his interview participants.
Whereas the latter usually represent the design of a device or its mechanical workings, models in the engineering sciences aim for scientific understanding of the behavior of different devices or the properties of diverse materials' (cf.
Hence, grounded theory gives the researcher more analytic power with fewer data.
During this whole process, we were sitting in our seats guiltily, both unhappy for disturbing the patient and for putting our specialist in this situation.
Narrative 1: Hesitant, scared comings, embarrassed, angry leavings First reading: Impressions, questions
Finally, the significance of feedback in this digital age cannot be overstated.
credibility, relevance, workability and resonance, Thornberg et al.
In LCA, the term "Functional Unit" is defined as a common ReferenceUnit for all activities in an LCA study.
relatively smaller numbers of men who were the clients of prostitutes ("johns") to connect nationally and internationally with others who shared their general interest, the growth of the Internet made it feasible for groups of johns to establish geographically-linked sites that allowed them to engage in conversation not only about broader issues involving prostitution, but also to exchange consumer-based information about local prices and services.
More example queries are available at the BONSAI SPARQL endpoint including the possibility of users writing their own queries.6,7
Qualitative inquiry produces knowledge that is idiographic and naturalistic and which may help us to generate ideas, to ‘see differently, and to act differently' (Peshkin, 1993): "the goal of qualitative inquiry is not the mere accumulation of information, but rather the transformation of understanding" (Sandelowski, 1997, p.128).
Clearly the preconceived approach and framework of QDA research is in conflict with the freedom of memoing.
At the time of Glaser and Strauss's (1967) cutting edge statement, they were very much speaking to sociologists.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/2158244017701800 Jones, K., Alexander, S.
Their locations and diverse publication outlets may mask both the quality of their research and the scope of their contributions (e.g.
SELECT * FROM <http://rdf.bonsai.uno/data/exiobase3_3_17/hsup> FROM <http://rdf.bonsai.uno/data/exiobase3_3_17/huse> FROM <http://rdf.bonsai.uno/data/exiobase3_3_17/emission> FROM <http://rdf.bonsai.uno/location/exiobase3_3_17> FROM <http://rdf.bonsai.uno/flowobject/exiobase3_3_17> FROM <http://rdf.bonsai.uno/activitytype/exiobase3_3_17> FROM <http://rdf.bonsai.uno/location/ystafdb> FROM <http://rdf.bonsai.uno/flowobject/ystafdb> FROM <http://rdf.bonsai.uno/activitytype/ystafdb> FROM <http://rdf.bonsai.uno/unit> FROM <http://rdf.bonsai.uno/time> WHERE { ?activity a bont:ActivityType .
Alternatively, the Qualitative Data Repository (QDR) is an example of a repository where researchers can deposit their data and access is controlled by the host (according to the security/access requirements stipulated by the researchers depositing the data); however, this data repository is located in the U.S.
Because qualitative researchers may have specific concerns and hesitation about engaging in open data sharing, NDRIO should aim to target qualitative researchers for contribution and participation during the upcoming town hall meetings as part of their needs assessment process to consult on issues and concerns related to the development of digital research infrastructure.
A feature of qualitative inquiry is to be flexible and have an emergent design (Facey et al., 2018); this is a strength as it allows researchers to be attuned and responsive to topics, issues, and new lines of questioning that are identified as important as the study unfolds, adapting their research plan to what is being learnt about the questions, participants, and methods used.
GT does not preconceive the theoretical code of process.
theoretical sorting and subsequent writing of the theory.
These concepts may be included in future expansions of the BONSAI ontology.
Such opportunities allow for greater scrutiny of the impact the researcher, herself, had in the research setting.
Apart from that, he argues that design research should produce knowledge and understanding, which sometimes he also calls artefacts.
2008 Conference on Human System Interactions, 570-573 (2008).
A reversion to QDA clearly blocks this necessary theoretical completeness.
In China, their self-understanding became fragmented due to gender discrimina tion, political corruption, and inability to manage the web of social relation ships in which they were embedded.
Sharing these data sources more openly with colleagues provides resources for those teaching and learning about qualitative research methodologies.
He said that the positivist view of the world is objective where behaviour and cause and effect can be measured and human activity can be predicted.
It's worth noting that technological means to secure data, which have become paramount, include robust cybersecurity measures and well-established procedures for data management and researcher training in ethical data handling.
(iii) Publication of the datasets on the Semantic Web with examples of querying.
By taking the context into account, this process is addressed at three main points: (1) understanding the researched situation in its own context (contextual understanding), (2) interpreting the researched situation in different contexts in the light of the findings in the literature and the contexts of these findings (multiple understanding, interpretation, and meaning-making in different contexts), and (3) proposing a new context, addressing the situation through it, and developing new frameworks and suggestions for its solution (re-contextualization and re-framing).
To spend time worrying about its place in QDA methods and science is just fancy, legitimating talk, but the result is the defaulting of GT to the confusion of QDA analysis.
Since QDA researchers focus on full description, and no core variable conceptual analysis, delimiting does not occur in QDA research.
Lyndhurst Collins (London: Tavistock, 1976), 16-43.
Big Data, Digital Humanities, and other new approaches to data analysis help produce meaningful knowledge about complex social phenomena without the need to formulate hypotheses.
The form event has a physical input and output, and an intentional input and output.
The ontology was published in a BONSAI-specific namespace.1 Specific IRIs were created for each class and predicate defined in the ontology.
[71] There are several fundamental analytic rules.
Examples are models of the economic market, of a missile launch, or of (a part or aspect of) a business organization.
activity without defining its origin or destination.
Examples of text objects are Mary's book, and Paul's computer chess game.
A suggestive examination of the various notions of robustness in science is William Wimsatt, "Robustness, Reliability, and Overdetermination," in Scientific Inquiry and the Social Sciences, ed.
Are digital research infrastructure tools and resources being used?
Simple, complicated and complex systems - the brief introduction.
Grounding Software Domain Ontologies in the Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO): The case of the ODE Software Process Ontology.
However, he also emphasized that the inductive process may still have some pre-existing theories or ideas when approaching a problem.
However, to be applicable to all kinds of LCSA datasets it was important to include broader definitions within the primary classes.
