Primary Health Care
Research & Development
cambridge.org/phc

A model proposal for qualitative data analysis,
interpretation, and reporting: contextuality,
reflectivity, and narrativity
Mehmet Ali Gülpınar

Development
Cite this article: Gülpınar MA. (2024) A model
proposal for qualitative data analysis,
interpretation, and reporting: contextuality,
reflectivity, and narrativity. Primary Health Care
Research & Development 25(e55): 1–11.
doi: 10.1017/S1463423624000562
Received: 28 December 2023
Revised: 5 July 2024
Accepted: 6 September 2024
Keywords:
Qualitative paradigm; qualitative studies;
research design
Corresponding author:
Mehmet Ali Gülpınar;
Email: mgulpinar@marmara.edu.tr

Faculty of Medicine, Eastern Mediterranean University, Famagusta, Turkey

Abstract
Rationale: From education to healthcare and management processes, it is important to address
the experience in health within its own complexity, context, and uniqueness. At this point,
qualitative studies come to the fore and this increases the need for practical guides and models
for qualitative studies. Qualitative studies have a paradigm that is different from quantitative
research and its paradigm ontologically, epistemologically, and methodologically. These
differences are reflected in the design of the research as well as the analysis, interpretation, and
reporting of qualitative data. From such a point of view, this paper first briefly outlines the
design process of qualitative studies and then proposes a model for the analysis, interpretation,
and reporting of qualitative data. Conceptual/theoretical framework: The three core concepts of
the model are ‘contextuality’, ‘reflectivity’, and ‘narrativity’. Such a conceptual/theoretical
framework transforms qualitative data analysis, interpretation, and reporting processes into
processes that are carried out with a reflective approach within their specific contexts. Model:
Taking this into account, by considering a contextual, reflective, and narrative approach, two
frameworks, namely, the ‘Contextual (Multiple) Reading and Analysis Framework’ consisting
of three stages and seven steps, and the ‘Contextual Understanding, Interpretation and
Reporting Framework’ consisting of four stages, were developed. This provides a practical guide
to contextual and reflective data analysis, interpretation, and reporting for the use of those
conducting qualitative studies.

From primary healthcare to education and governance processes, it is important to address all
health-related experiences in their integrity, complexity, and context, with their behavioural,
social, and humane dimensions. This challenging situation brings with it a new approach to
education, healthcare, and health research: a holistic and contextual approach. At this point,
qualitative studies come to the fore and this increases the need for practical guides and models
for qualitative studies. In this regard, the present paper proposes a model for the analysis,
interpretation, and reporting of qualitative data within the framework of contextuality,
reflexivity, and narrativity.
Qualitative studies

© The Author(s), 2024. Published by Cambridge
University Press. This is an Open Access article,
distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution licence (https://creative
commons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits
unrestricted re-use, distribution and
reproduction, provided the original article is
properly cited.

Quantitative and qualitative research, with their distinctive paradigms, core concepts, foci, and
methods, address different aspects of the situation to be researched. Therefore, each has its own
strengths and weaknesses. For this reason, it is important to take these aspects of research into
consideration and use them appropriately (Cleland, 2015). Despite the emphasis on objectivity,
objective reality, objectification, and quantification in quantitative research, which is based on a
positivist and reductionist approach, the emphasis in qualitative research, which has a different
paradigm, is on understanding and interpreting the experience (situation and phenomenon)
studied in its integrity, complexity, authenticity, and contextuality. In quantitative research
grounded on theories and hypotheses, there is a subject–object relationship. Associative
relationships and causative relationships between variables are tried to be revealed. An effort is
made to handle, explain, generalize, predict, and control the de-contextualized situation. In
qualitative studies, which prioritize experience and proceed through research problems
determined within the framework of existing theories, holistic phenomena/situations are
handled in their own quality and singularity within intersubjective interaction and
transformation (intersubjectivity). Efforts are made to describe, understand, and interpret; to
explore and elucidate in depth. It is aimed to reveal intrinsic tendencies, affinities, attitudes, and
behavioural patterns; and also, similarities and differences in understanding and making sense
of phenomena. Furthermore, the quality of quantitative and qualitative studies is evaluated on
the basis of different criteria. While the criteria used in quantitative research are ‘internal and
external validity’, ‘reliability’, and ‘objectivity’, the evaluation of qualitative research is based on
different ones such as ‘credibility’, ‘transferability’, ‘dependability’, ‘confirmability’, and

https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2

‘authenticity’ (Creswell, 2012; Creswell, 2013; Cleland, 2015; Mann
& MacLeod, 2015; McMillan, 2015). Therefore, in the qualitative
research process, it is important to consider the limitations of
qualitative research as well as the differences between qualitative
and quantitative research. The limitations of qualitative research
include the following: not being sufficiently understood and
accepted in the scientific community from time to time due to its
different paradigm and process; difficulties in dealing with
intensive qualitative data, labour-intensive, and time-consuming
analysis process, requiring a meticulous process and management;
weak explanatory and generalizing power; and more dependability
of the analysis and interpretation processes on the individual skills
of the researchers, therefore, it is not easy for the researchers to take
the scientific distance in the process and is more prone to personal
biases and idiosyncrasies (Anderson, 2010; Queirós et. al. 2017).
Therefore, it is critical that qualitative studies are designed,
implemented, and reported taking into account these paradigmlevel differences (different ontology, epistemology, and methodology). Qualitative studies should not be reduced to the use of
qualitative data collection methods and tools; they should be
differentiated from mixed design research in which quantitative
and qualitative methods and tools are used together. Qualitative
studies are research studies designed within a different paradigm
with a different understanding of reality and knowledge, different
research designs, research methods, and tools. It is not limited to
the collection, analysis, and presentation of qualitative data
obtained by using qualitative data collection methods and tools.
Design of qualitative studies
Three points are critical in the design of qualitative studies:
establishing a coherent macro and micro-framing, drawing the
research model or conceptual/theoretical framework, and identifying the research problems. In this section, first of all, explanations
on these three points are explained under the following three
subheadings: ‘establishing a macro and micro framing’, ‘constructing the conceptual and theoretical framework’, and ‘determining the research problems’.
Establishing a macro- and micro-framing
Establishing an integrated framing, from the approach chosen to
the theories, from the research design selected to the data collection
methods and tools will be decisive for the quality of the qualitative
studies to be conducted (Bezuidenhout & van Schalkwyk, 2015;
Bleakley & Cleland, 2015; Mann & MacLeod, 2015). A design
without a macro-framework at the paradigm level, a well-defined
theoretical framework, and appropriate research design with
method and instrument choices will result in an incomplete and
problematic qualitative study.
For the macro-framing of qualitative work, there are
approaches with different ontologies and epistemologies (understandings of reality and knowledge) and foci, such as internal/
cognitive constructivism, sociocultural constructivism, and structuralism; existential, experiential, phenomenological, and interpretivist/hermeneutic approaches; and narrativity, complexity,
socio-material, Marxist, feminist, and critical approaches. The
second framing is done by using the theories and models available
in the literature concerning the situation or phenomenon that is
the subject of the qualitative study. At this point, rather than
general approaches, there are more specific theories and models
such as Experiential, Transformational Learning Theories (Kolb,

https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Mehmet Ali Gülpınar

Mezirov), Activity Theories (Cultural-Historical Activity Theory),
Actor–Network Theory, Flow Theory (Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi),
Situated Learning, Emotional Singularity, Community of Practice,
and Cognitive Load Theory. The theoretical framework of the
study is established through a detailed literature review and
reading. Research designs in the literature for qualitative studies
include narrative study, action research, participatory action
research, ethnographic study, phenomenology, grounded design,
and case study. Qualitative data collection methods and tools
include observation, participant observation, one-on-one in-depth
interviews, focus group interviews, a special interview technique
based on metaphors (Imaginative Metaphor Elicitation), reflective
sessions, reflective writing, narrative writing, document analysis,
text analysis, etc. (Creswell, 2013; Bleakley & Cleland, 2015;
Fenwick & Nimmo, 2015; Mann & MacLeod, 2015; Nardon &
Amrita, 2021). The design of the qualitative study is revealed by
determining the most appropriate research design and methods
among these.
In the design of qualitative studies described above, two
components are critical: establishing the conceptual framework
and identifying the research problems. The position of these two is
at the heart of the design. It is at the centre of the implementation,
analysis, and reporting processes of the qualitative study (Creswell,
2012; Bezuidenhout & van Schalkwyk, 2015).

Constructing the conceptual and theoretical framework
When writing the qualitative study proposal, the theories
identified through a rigorous literature review and reading are
discussed in the introduction. The concepts, structures,
components, and dimensions of the theories and the interactions and modelling between them are explained. Then, taking
these theories into account, a model (research model) or
framework (conceptual/theoretical framework) specific to the
qualitative study is constructed. With this, the core concept set
of the study is determined; the relationships between variables
are visualized, the links between the main structure, components, and dimensions are revealed; the essence of the
phenomenon/experience in the phenomenological study is
visualized. In the design process of the qualitative study, the
model, or conceptual/theoretical framework of the research,
which is drawn as a draft, is finalized by improving it in line with
the findings obtained during the analysis and interpretation of
qualitative data. If a model or framework could not be drawn at
the design stage, it emerges during the analysis and interpretation of qualitative data.

Determining the research problems
After the conceptual/theoretical framework of the qualitative study
is drawn, research problems are determined. The conceptual
framework and research problems drawn specific to the research
are at the heart of the methodology, data collection, analysis and
interpretation, and reporting processes. They give direction to
these processes and specify their foci. However, at the same time, in
these processes, which should be carried out with a reflective
approach, the conceptual framework and research problems are
repeatedly reviewed and reorganized/improved with the experiences and outputs. What has been said so far is illustrated with an
example in Figure 1a and 1b.

Primary Health Care Research & Development

Research problems

Conceptual, theoretical framework

Macro and micro framing

(a)

1. What are the emotional experiences of team members during clinical practice and
training processes in the surgical clinic?
2. In what context do the parties experience emotional experiences?
3. What are the effects of these contextualized emotional experiences on the participants?

Conceptual, theoretical framework

Macro and micro framing

(b)

Research problems

1. What are the dominant patterns of professional identity formation (PIF) in narratives of
clinical experiences?
2. What are the qualities of the role models that emerge in these narratives?
3. How and in what ways does the context in which clinical experiences are lived affect
PIF?

Figure 1. (a) Ethnography study on the healthcare and clinical education experiences of the surgical team. (b) A narrative study on professional identity formation.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press

3

4

Analysis, interpretation, and reporting of qualitative data
Data analysis and reporting in qualitative studies begin with data
collection based on the conceptual framework and research
problems determined. They continue with the analysis and
interpretation of the data through multiple readings. It is
important that this process is handled in a reflective continuum
of deepening reading, focusing, meaning-making, and interpretation rather than a repetitive mechanical process (Srivastava &
Hopwood, 2009). In this way, throughout the qualitative study, a
reflective process is experienced in which the research problems,
data collection and analysis, conceptual/theoretical framework,
meaning-making, and interpretation processes are repeatedly
reviewed, evaluated, and reorganized (Creswell, 2012;
Creswell, 2013).
According to Srivastava and Hopwood (2009), the process of
reflective analysis is driven by three main questions: (1) what does
the data tell us, (2) what do I want to know (the research questions
identified, the theoretical frameworks based on), and (3) the
dialectical relationship between what the data tell us and what I
want to know. In other words, it is possible to frame this process as
a reflective process of interaction and transformation between
experience (narratives, data) and theory (existing theories).
Through such a process, the focus of the research, the research
questions, and the conceptual framework are refined and further
refined through reflection and reorganization of the qualitative study.
In the literature, there are various concrete proposals and
models for the analysis and interpretation of qualitative data. Data
analysis and presentation processes for different qualitative
research approaches (narrative, phenomenology, grounded theory,
ethnography, and case study) are described in detail, taking into
account the characteristics of the approaches (Ajjawi Higgs, 2007;
Creswell, 2012; Creswell, 2013; Cleland & Durning, 2015). In
general, it is possible to summarize the process through the six
steps defined by Creswell: preparing and organizing the data for
analysis; initial exploration of the data through the process of
coding it; developing a more general picture of the data
(descriptions and constructing themes); representing the findings; interpreting and reporting the findings; and validating the
accuracy of findings (member validation/checking, external
audit, expert opinions/panel, and data and theoretical triangulation). As a more specific model, the stages in Ajjawi and Higgs’
six-stage model for hermeneutic analysis are as follows:
immersion (pre-interpreting and getting a general sense of the
data); understanding (deeper understanding and coding through
the participant’s own statements; abstraction (identifying subthemes); synthesis and theme development; and illumination and
illustration of phenomena and integration and critique of
findings within the research team and externally (confirming
the appropriateness of the themes and reporting) (Ajjawi &
Higgs, 2007; Bynum et al., 2021).
A qualitative analysis and interpretation proposal:
contextual, reflective, and narrative model
While qualitative data analysis and interpretation processes are
framed through reflectivity, the emphasis on contextuality and
narrativity is not sufficient. However, it is important to analyse and
interpret experiences through their unique contexts and narratives.
In the model proposed in this paper, a contextual, narrative as well
as reflective approach is adopted. Therefore, the analysis,

https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Mehmet Ali Gülpınar

interpretation, and reporting processes are framed as narrative,
contextual, and reflective processes.
Conceptual and theoretical basis of the model
The three core concepts of the model are ‘contextuality’,
‘reflectivity’, and ‘narrativity’. Based on these three concepts, a
framework for the analysis, interpretation, and reporting of
qualitative data was developed.
Contextuality
It is important to consider all processes related to education,
including qualitative studies, from educational change to curriculum development, learning, assessment, and evaluation processes,
within the framework of the ‘complex social system’ approach with
its own complexity and contextuality (Gülpınar, 2021; Gülpınar,
2024; Bleakley & Cleland, 2015). Complex social systems are
process-focused and context-dependent systems, where process
and context are intertwined. In this approach, where individuals
and teams are accepted as actors with will, it is more appropriate to
talk about co-framing and co-transforming, where the context and
actors transform each other in contextual experience processes that
progress through ‘mutual interaction and transformation’ rather
than the linearity and determinism (non-linear and nondeterministic approach) of the natural, structural, sociocultural,
or contextual (Gülpınar, 2021).
In general, contextuality is mirrored in this model in the
following ways:
The first implication for qualitative data analysis is to transform
the reading and analysis of qualitative data into a contextual one. In
this direction, the following two points should be added to the
analysis process: what are the ‘contextual characteristics’ in the text
(i.e. what is the context of the experience/narrative) and how do the
experiencing parties ‘relate to the context’ (see Table 2. Contextual
text reading and analysis template).
Another implication is the suggestion of ‘multi-layered reading
and analysis’. In multiple readings, in the first analysis, two to three
main context domains are identified based on the above two
considerations (contextual characteristics, the way of relating to
the context). Then, by returning to the text, the data can be
subjected to multi-layered reading and analysis in the focus of each
determined context separately. This type of reading allows for
more focused and in-depth data analysis.
The contextualization of interpretation and meaning-making
processes is another implication in this way. By taking the context
into account, this process is addressed at three main points: (1)
understanding the researched situation in its own context
(contextual understanding), (2) interpreting the researched
situation in different contexts in the light of the findings in the
literature and the contexts of these findings (multiple understanding, interpretation, and meaning-making in different contexts), and (3) proposing a new context, addressing the situation
through it, and developing new frameworks and suggestions for its
solution (re-contextualization and re-framing).
The last implication in this direction is the inclusion of the
heading ‘Contextuality and Reflexivity’ in the methodology section
of the report. Under this heading, the context in which the
qualitative study takes place (institutional, local, social, national,
etc.) and the context of the research and the research team itself are
clarified. In this way, the qualitative study is strengthened in terms
of many criteria (confirmability and transferability).

Primary Health Care Research & Development

Experience
(Re-experience)
Triple reflection
Development
plans

Core concepts

(for individual,
team,
organization)

Contextuality

Complexity
Reflectivity

Reflecting on;
1. quality of task and
performance
2. individual's/ team's/
organization's own
experience
3. context

Re-contextualizing
Re-framing

THE CONTEXT OF EXPERIENCE

Figure 2. Contextual reflective practice with triple reflection.

Reflectivity
Contextual reflective practice is a practice in which the parties look
at their experiences and the context in which the experience takes
place from a certain critical distance and reflect on these. In this
way, they experience a practice in which they develop and
transform by learning from concrete experiences, and through this,
they transform both the practice and the context in which it takes
place. In reflectivity, it is important to start from a concrete
experience and return to it. It is a reflection on experience and the
context in which the experience takes place rather than a reflection
on thought as in philosophy. Another important point is the
encounter between experience (concrete) and existing theories
(abstract) and the transformation of both theory and experience
together as a result of these encounters. As can be seen in Figure 2,
contextual reflective practices are continuous contextual and
reflective processes of experiencing, reflecting on experiences and
their contexts, re-contextualizing, re-framing, and re-experiencing.
So, it is important to conduct qualitative studies as reflective
processes. In such a reflective process, the qualitative study
becomes stronger in terms of criteria such as credibility,
confirmability, and transferability.

5

theories in the processes of understanding. It also emphasizes
staying in the experience and narrative and returning to the
narrative again and again, while also seeing existing theories as an
important component of the process of understanding. The most
important trap at this point is to make a superficial reading and
analysis by foregrounding existing theories, and in this way,
reproducing what is already present in theory.
Narrativity and reflectivity can be translated into qualitative
study processes in several different ways. Reflective, narrative
writings, and reflective researcher diaries written by the researcher
are some of them. Through reflective/narrative writings and the
researcher’s diary, the researcher writes their own narratives about
the implementation and data analysis processes and their
reflections on their experiences. They take notes on the process
and explain the changes made during the process with their
justifications. Another way is to write narratives during the
reporting process. With this, the qualitative study will become
stronger in terms of multiple criteria (credibility, confirmability,
and authenticity).
Narratives can be written in the following three sections in
reporting:
‘Contextuality and reflexivity’ in the Methods section, where
the primary researcher narrates how they experienced the
qualitative research process with its contextual dimensions.
In the ‘Findings’ section, re-narrating one to two representative
experiences in the words of participants in a way that vividly
reflects the experience and the context in which the experience
was lived.
In the ‘Interpretation and suggestions’ section, the narration of
a sample experience (re-experiencing) through the re-contextualization and re-framing that emerged as a result of the
interpretation.
Contextual, reflective, and narrative model
In this model, developed through a triple approach, the ‘qualitative
data analysis and interpretation process’ and the ‘reporting
process’ are addressed separately and two concrete frameworks
are developed.
First framework: a three-phased contextual (multiple)
reading and analysis framework

Narrativity
Individuals, teams, and organizations construct their individual,
professional, and organizational meaning-makings, realities,
professional identities, and organizational cultures through
narratives of their contextual and reflective experiences (narrative
construction of reality, self, and professional/organizational
identity). Therefore, narrativity has recently come to the forefront
as a different approach in all fields from healthcare and education
to change and leadership processes (Bruner, 1991; Bruner, 2006;
Charon, 2007).
A similar situation can be mentioned for qualitative studies. As
will be remembered, qualitative studies conducted on the institutional and social experiences of an individual, a team, or a
particular community focus on the uniqueness and subjectivity of
experiences. It puts the effort to understand and interpret them at
the centre. Therefore, understanding and interpreting the
situations, processes, and outcomes of these experiences requires
being open to the narratives of individuals, teams, institutions, and
communities. It emphasizes prioritizing narratives over existing

https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The first framework based on contextual reading and analysis of
qualitative data, the ‘Three-phased Contextual (Multiple) Reading
and Analysis Framework’, consists of two different types of
analysis. These are ‘single-layered’ and ‘multi-layered’ reading and
analysis. In multi-layered reading and analysis, which is presented
as a different reading method, there is multiple reading and
analysis of the text by focusing on two to three different contexts.
The process is carried out by reading, analysing, and interpreting
the narratives related to the experience that is the subject of the
research separately through two to three selected contexts in a
layered and therefore more nuanced and in-depth manner. For
example, in ethnographic research with a narrative design in which
the narratives of the surgical team about their experiences in
clinical education and healthcare processes are studied, the
qualitative data collected can be subjected to triple reading and
analysis through three different contexts, namely (1) social,
emotional, relational context, (2) system, and (3) dominant
discourse, language, and patterns of relating to power in
institutional and social culture. A fourth layer can be in the form

6

Mehmet Ali Gülpınar

Table 1. Contextual text reading and analysis template
Narrative 1: : : :
First reading: Impressions, questions

Experience/narrative
Re-arranged text

In-depth reading and analysis

Reflections of the researcher, the person analysing

Codes
Metaphors
Potential themes
Contextual elements, features
How it relates to the context

of reading and analysis on embodied predispositions, orientations,
attitudes, and behaviours (habitus) and frequently used ‘metaphors’ in such a habitus.
The framework model, which consists of three phases and seven
steps, is described below. The analysis process is carried out
through the template prepared and an example of such a template
is given in Table 1. An example of an analysis using this template is
also presented in Table 2.
Phase I: initial readings and analysis
Step 1 – pre-reading and analysis. In this step, the text is generally
read from beginning to end and first impressions, thoughts,
feelings, and questions are noted. It is critical that the analysis is
done independently by at least two researchers (credibility). After
reading the text, the analysers can ‘take a step back’ and ask
themselves the following question: ‘What is this text/narrative
mainly talking about, what does it mean?’ Other questions they can
then ask themselves are: ‘Do we need more data to understand
exactly what the experience (situation, phenomenon) is? Is it
necessary to define an additional problem or sub-problem that is
not defined in the research problem but emerges from the first
readings?’
Step 2 – review the research problems, data collection process,
and conceptual/theoretical framework. This step is done together
with the research team. If the first reading points out issues for
improving the research problems or the data collection process,
required adjustments are made. The identified research problems
are reviewed and re-defined. Plans are made to collect additional
data. If data are collected through, for example, in-depth
interviews, participant observation and/or narrative writing,
additional interviews, writing, or observation are planned and
conducted. When necessary, a new method or tool is included in
the design to collect supporting data or to triangulate the data.
The conceptual and theoretical framework created/selected in
the process of designing the qualitative study is reviewed, the
literature is revisited, and if necessary, adjustments are made
within this framework.
Step 3 – extended contextual reading and analysis. In this step,
again independently by two researchers, the prominent experiences/narratives in the text are marked (fragmented, underlined,
coloured, classified, and labelled), along with their main points/
emphases and the contextual features in which the experience takes
place, in line with the (reorganized) research problems. Codes and
themes are then created based on these.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press

a. Creation of initial codes: First, the text is segmented, labelled,
and coded through repeated readings. Then, the codes that
emerged first-hand are reorganized by combining, rephrasing, and eliminating some of them (25–30 codes). It is
important to do this process by taking into account the
research problems. Otherwise, the focus of the research will
be lost through over-coding and this may result in the
researchers getting lost in the text and codes.
b. Identifying the contexts in which the experience takes place,
with their contextual features: A similar reading and analysis
is carried out regarding the contexts in which the experience/
narrative takes place and the features of these contexts. In this
regard, identifications are made and codes are created.
c. Creating subthemes and themes: Based on the reorganized
codes, these are transformed into more inclusive, abstract
expressions to create subthemes and themes related to the
experience and the context in which it was lived (five to eight
themes of two to four words each). At this point, we returned
to the theories determined during the design of the research,
on which the research topic was based. The concepts of these
theories can be utilized during the identification of themes.
However, there are two critical issues to be considered at this
point. The first is to prioritize the experience and stay in the
experience, and thus, instead of making visible a difference that
emerges through analysis, to prioritize the theory, to quickly match
the themes with the existing explanations and conceptualizations
of the theories, and thus to miss the nuances and uniqueness that
can emerge through qualitative work. Another common trap is to
carry out a superficial reading and analysis and conduct theming as
a way of collecting content and giving it descriptive titles. This is
not what theming is about.
d. Consensus on themes, determining main contexts, and
dimensions: Researchers who independently determine codes
and themes come together at this point and reach a consensus
on the outputs. The agreed themes are grouped among
themselves to form the main contexts and dimensions. A
third researcher may be engaged to ensure consensus at this
point, and expert opinion may be consulted to refine the
decisions. Again, in this step, it is important to select one to
two people from different participant segments to confirm
the relevance of the outputs and how well they match with the
participants’ own experiences.
Phase II: framing/modelling
In this phase, the research team works together to construct the
conceptual/theoretical framework or research model together with

Narrative 1: Hesitant, scared comings, embarrassed, angry leavings
First reading:
Impressions,
questions

Experience/narrative
Re-arranged text

In-depth reading and analysis

Reflections of the researcher, person analysing

Work focused
AND
Blindness to the
human
situation,
emotions, and
culture
Both for patients,
their relatives,
and for
physicians and
learners
Inhumane
environment
(physical,
social)

I was in the outpatient clinic during the first week of my
urology internship. Seven of my friends and I entered the
outpatient clinic door at 9.30 in the morning. Our outpatient
clinics were behind locked doors and designed to let in only
the patients whose turn it was. As we entered, we showed our
coats and cards to the attendant at the appointment desk. It
was quite small and consisted of 4 rooms with no windows.
Our specialist was already seeing patients in the room at the
far end, which was bigger than the others. He had been
seeing patients non-stop since 8 am and it was clear that he
was already getting tired. When he saw us, he cheered up and
invited us into the room with a smile. In that tiny room, eight
of us sat on stools by the door and waited for the new patient
to arrive. While the patient is inside, our specialist is only
interested in him/her. He would later tell us the patient’s
history and which tests he wanted and for what purpose.
About an hour later, a young couple entered the polyclinic
door. The couple looked around in the short corridor and
our doctor called their names and called them into the
room. The couple in their mid-20s entered the room with
hesitant steps, holding hands. They stood and waited for
guidance. The woman was waiting almost hidden behind
her partner, never lifting her face from the floor. While they
were standing, not knowing what to do, our expert was
reading information about their previous arrival on the
computer. Without looking up from the computer, he asked
them to hand him the barcode. As the woman was
rummaging through her purse, she dropped her wallet on
the floor and her belongings scattered on the floor. After
barely handing over the barcode, she hurriedly picked up
her belongings. As the woman picked up her purse, our
doctor looked up for the first time and smiled at the couple
and told them they could sit down. A little more relaxed, the
couple moved to the two chairs opposite. Neither of them
had looked at us at all since they entered. After three
minutes, which seemed like an infinite time to everyone in
the room, our specialist asked them why they had visited.
The man started talking saying that his name was M. and the
lady next to him was A. and that they had been married for
3 years. His speech, which started quite confidently, started
to shake as he got to his complaints. His voice got lower
and lower and avoiding eye contact, he said that he had
returned from the army 2 years ago, that he and his wife
were trying to have a child, that they first went to a
gynecologist and had her checked. He continued speaking
in a shaky voice. Since all her wife’s tests were normal and
suitable for conception, he had now consulted a urologist.

Codes
Work orientation
Intrusive computer and processes
Constant patient care, fatigue
Failure to see the situation, emotions, and culture of the
patient and his/her relatives: privacy, shyness, shame,
inability to have children in the culture, patriarchy?
An angular, sharp language, and discourse over power

During this experience, there was a huge crowd in the
corridor of the polyclinic and in front of the door.
The doors were locked because someone kept poking their
head in.
During the analysis, I thought about how I relate to cultural
and emotional situations during my own experiences in
healthcare processes, how much I should or should not
include them in the process, and my ambivalence at this
point.

Metaphors
A war where everyone is on their guard
Three minutes that seemed like forever
Sitting guiltily in your seat Invisibility

Primary Health Care Research & Development

https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Table 2. Example of contextual text reading and analysis

Potential themes
Clinical workload, work-orientedness (routine, technical
processes), and the de-humanization
Emotional, culturally unsafe encounters
Authoritarian language and discourse in the patient–
physician relationship
Contextual elements, features
Physical, social, relational context:
Locked doors, sequential, authorized entrances
Four small windowless rooms, 9 people where even 1
person is too many
Relating through work, not seeing what is humane, what
is cultural
Social, cultural context:
Power relationship/authoritarian relationship,
authoritarian, reactive discourse, and behaviours, e.g.
Not seeking consent ‘This is a university hospital : : : ’
‘He both comes here and wants something’
How it relates to the context
Instead of expressing and sharing feelings, it is a
cumulative, explosive, charged reactive way of relating:
Tolerating boredom, embarrassment, and finally
responding explosively (patient and physician)
Patient: ‘don’t let them be in the room when we get
back : : : ’
Physician: ‘This is a university hospital : : : ’
‘he both comes here and wants something’
Taking your guard up in battle
Relating by being silence, storing up (students): Silence,
guilty standing, and invisibility

(Continued)

7

8

https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Table 2. (Continued )
Narrative 1: Hesitant, scared comings, embarrassed, angry leavings

Mehmet Ali Gülpınar

When he finished, he looked up for the first time and said in
a bold and clear tone that he wanted to have children and
would do whatever needed to be done.
Our specialist told him in a gentle tone that varicocele should
be excluded first in male infertility and told him to go to the
next room, take off his clothes and wait for us. 1–2 minutes
after Mr. M. left the room, he stood up and put on his
gloves. Turning to us, he said, ‘Come on friends, what are
you waiting for? You have to see this’. We stood up eagerly
at the same time as if we had agreed because none of us
had ever seen a varicocele examination before. As the 9 of
us headed to the other room, his wife Mrs. A. looked up at
us in horror for the first time since she entered the room.
She watched as we all took turns crowding into a stuffy
room. He did not know what a varicocele examination was,
but he understood the general concept. His cheeks turned
red and his shoulders slumped as if in defeat. When we
went into the other room, Mr. M. stared at the wall without
looking at us. Like his wife, he prepared as if he wanted to
say something, but he said nothing. Our specialist explained
to us in detail and performed a varicocele examination. It
was obvious from his body language that Mr. M. was very
uncomfortable. He was fidgeting all the time and shaking
his head from right to left as if to say how come. At that
moment, it was obvious that Mr. M. wanted us not to be in
that room. Neither he nor his wife wanted us in that
intimate moment. Be sure that none of us wanted to be in
that room after seeing their discomfort. Even one doctor
was too much for them, and there were 9 of us, but our
specialist didn’t seem to notice any of them. He didn’t even
ask them if we could go in. After the examination, Mr. M.
hurriedly got dressed. He never looked at his wife or us. Our
specialist was sending them away after ordering some tests
when Mr. M. gathered his courage and asked us not to be in
the room when they returned. His tone was quite harsh and
demanding. Our specialist immediately took his guard up
and said in the same tone that this was a university
hospital and if they did not want this, they would not come
here. He continued to complain in a harsh tone that he was
coming here and demanding something. During this whole
process, we were sitting in our seats guiltily, both unhappy
for disturbing the patient and for putting our specialist in
this situation. At that moment, everything felt like our fault.
The young couple walked out of the doctor’s office, now
nervous and embarrassed.
And at the end of the day, everyone got their wish. In the
midst of his hundreds of tasks, our specialist had forgotten
that the argument had even happened this morning. When
the young couple returned, we weren’t really there. We
were somehow invisible in this event in which our presence
was the protagonist. We were just casualties in a war in
which everyone was on guard and prepared.

Primary Health Care Research & Development

its contextual dimensions. It is critical to consult expert opinion at
this point. Framing can be done in two ways. First, if there is no
concrete conceptual, theoretical framework selected from the
theories in the literature or created by the research team for the
study, the framework is constructed here for the first time. The
other is to reorganize the existing framework based on the analysis
outputs. According to the results of the analysis, if it is seen that the
existing framework is working, the necessary modifications
are made.
Step 4 – organizing/creating the conceptual, theoretical
framework. Taking into account the two to three main contexts
(which frame the experience in various aspects, differentiate,
transform and give meaning to the experience with its process,
outcome and effects) and themes determined by consensus in the
previous step, the conceptual/theoretical framework of the
research (or the model of the research), which was initially
created in the design process, is reorganized. If the framework/
model was not created during the design process, it is presented for
the first time in this step. At the same time, in this step, if multiple/
layered reading and analysis will be carried out over two to three
contexts in the next advanced analysis phase, these layers will also
be visualized.
Step 5 – revision of the research problems. Based on the emerging
or revised conceptual/theoretical framework and the two to three
main contexts of the experience, the research problems are
reviewed and revised if necessary.
Phase III: advanced reading, analysis, and framing
Step 6 – advanced reading and analysis. In this step, further
reading and analysis is carried out independently by two
researchers. One of the following two methods is used in this
reading: (1) single-layered contextual reading and analysis, and (2)
multi-layered reading and analysis through two to three main
contexts identified. If the content in the narratives of the two to
three contexts is dense and sufficient, layered reading may be
preferred. In this way, with two to three separate readings, each
specific to a main context, more focused, in-depth, and finegrained analysis of the text will be possible through these layers;
themes and sub-themes will be determined context-specifically.
a. Single-layered reading and analysis: The text is returned to
and read again through the emerging framework (with its
contextual dimensions) and the revised research problem.
With this reading, the themes, dimensions and contexts
agreed upon in the previous stage are checked, supporting
and contradicting quotations/data are marked, revised if
necessary, and new themes are identified, if any. In this way,
both the relevance of the analysis outputs is tested
(verification, confirmation) and the outputs are finalized.
In this process, sample quotations to be used in the report are
also selected.
b. Multi-layered reading and analysis: Based on the two to three
main contexts identified in the previous stage, the text is read
and analysed separately for each context. Themes and subthemes are constructed specific to the context in question.
Again, if necessary, the research team can come together to
create a separate conceptual framework for each main
context.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press

9

Step 7 – finalizing the conceptual/theoretical framework of the
study. After single or multi-layered advanced reading and analysis,
taking into account the outputs refined in step six, the research
team comes together and finalizes the conceptual/theoretical
framework of the study. The research problems are reviewed for
the last time and adjustments, if any, are made. In this step, the
conceptual/theoretical framework can also be enhanced by seeking
expert opinion or organizing an expert panel with a group selected
from different fields of expertise.
Throughout the seven-step process, interpretation processes
begin and evolve along with contextual and reflective analysis.
However, by the end of the seventh step, it is time to intensify the
process of contextual interpretation and reporting on the final
outputs/findings. Within the scope of this model, a second
framework has been developed in this sense and its details are
presented below.
Second framework: a four-phased contextual understanding,
interpretation, and reporting framework
In this model, which was developed by assuming a different
paradigm, the processes of understanding and interpretation are
framed. Before moving on to the second concrete framework of the
model, we first tried to draw a conceptual framework for
contextual understanding. With this framework, which can be
named as ‘Triple Contextual Understanding and Interpretation’, it
is possible to differentiate the understanding and interpretation of
qualitative studies as follows:
1. Understanding in its context: Here, the effort to understand
the experience (situation, phenomenon) that is the subject of
the qualitative study in its own context is dominant. This
effort to understand starts with the process of analysing
qualitative data and continues with the writing of findings in
reporting. At this point, experience is prioritized rather than
theory, and staying in the experience is predominantly
considered during the process.
2. Understanding and interpreting in different contexts: At this
point, theory as well as experience is taken into account, and
the experience that is the subject of the qualitative study, the
findings of the qualitative study, and different approaches,
theoretical frameworks, scientific studies, and their contexts
in the literature are discussed and interpreted together. Here,
there is an effort to understand, interpret and make sense
together through different contexts, approaches, and theoretical foundations. The discussion/comment section in the
report is written through such an effort of understanding and
interpretation.
3. Re-contextualization and re-framing: The effort to understand and interpret in different contexts is completed at the
third step with re-contextualization and re-framing (abstraction). In the process of analysing qualitative data, the reframing that starts with the second stage (establishing the
conceptual and theoretical framework) continues while
writing the discussion/interpretation section in the report
and is completed with the limitations, conclusion, and
recommendations written at the end of the section. The
reframing/contextualization of the qualitative study is
evaluated through reflections on the contexts of the
experience, the research design and the team; its strengths
and limitations are discussed. Conclusions and recommendations are written through reframing.

10

Mehmet Ali Gülpınar

CONCRETE EXPERIENCE

THEORY (ABSTRACTION)
REFLEXIVITY

Distancing the experience

Distancing existing theories and

and its context and reflecting on them

reflecting on them

CONTEXTUALITY
1. Contextual

2. Understanding and interpretation

3. Re-contextualizing

understanding

in different contexts

re-framing

NARRATIVITY
Staying in experience, narrative

Re-experiencing, -narrating

understand what kind of experience is lived in what kind of
context, how the parties relate to this context, how and in what way
this context and the way they relate affect the experience, and what
the consequences are. Another way of presentation is to visualize
the components, dimensions, patterns, weights, or interrelationships that emerge from the analysis (conceptual framework, model
of the research, concept clouds, diagrams, etc.).
As in the first phase, narratives/stories can also be used here.
However, in this case, the narrative/story is written with a different
purpose. The aim is to re-narrate in the voice of one to two
representative participants, using sample statements, one to two
typical experiences that emerged from the analyses, in a way that
vividly reflects the experience and the context in which the
experience took place.

Figure 3. Contextual understanding and interpretation spectrum.

When concrete experience and existing theories from the
literature (abstraction) are placed at the two ends of the spectrum,
the position in this triple understanding and interpretation will
shift from right to left as we move from the first to the third
(Figure 3).
Considering this triple understanding and interpretation, a
‘Four-phased Contextual Understanding, Interpretation and
Reporting Framework’ has been developed for the reporting
process. These stages can be briefly summarized as follows:
Phase 1 – presenting the context of the qualitative study
The context of the qualitative study is presented in the
methodology section of the report. This context can be presented
in two ways.
a. Contextuality and reflexivity: It is one of the indispensable
headings of the method section in qualitative studies. Two
types of explanations are given under this heading. The first is
a detailed explanation of the context (institutional, social,
regional, and national) of the experience addressed in the
qualitative study. The second is a description of the team
conducting the research. In the research, thick descriptions
and reflections are written about who and what was done, the
context in which the research was conducted, and the
individual/team contexts of the researchers (Rudd &
D’Andrea, 2015).
These contexts and reflections are also taken into account when
writing the discussion and interpretation sections. All these
contextual and reflective accounts strengthen the qualitative study
in terms of multiple criteria (credibility, confirmability, and
transferability).
b. Narrative: The primary researcher can write a short story/
narrative about their experience, taking into account the
diary they kept during the research process and their
narrative and reflective writings, reflecting the context of the
field, institution and society in which the experience took
place. In this way, the qualitative research process is
presented as alive with its context.
Phase 2 – understanding and presenting in context
When writing the findings section, the themes and subthemes that
emerge as a result of the analysis are presented with sample
phrases. Here, both the experience that is the subject of the research
and its context are presented in detail. An effort is made to

https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Phase 3 – understanding and interpreting in different contexts
and presenting the situation subject to the research in multiple
ways
While writing the discussion and interpretation section of the
qualitative research, the findings of the study are compared with
the literature and the situation subject to the research is tried to be
understood and interpreted. Here, both the findings of the research
and the context revealed by the research and other studies and
theories in the literature are taken into consideration together and
the situation in question is interpreted through different contexts,
findings, and theoretical frameworks. Various aspects are
presented in detail. Different approaches, theoretical frameworks,
and the conceptual/theoretical framework that emerged in this
study are critically evaluated with their possibilities and
limitations. Furthermore, through reflections on the context of
the research in question, the understanding, interpretation, sensemaking, and inferences put forward in the study are evaluated
together with their strengths and limitations.
Stage 4 – recontextualization, framing, and presenting recommendations based on this. With the theoretical/conceptual
framework that emerges from the qualitative study, the experience
(situation and phenomenon) that is the subject of the research is
re-contextualized and theoretically reframed. In this way, it
contributes to the literature to improve and transform both the
experience that is the subject of the research and the existing
theoretical frameworks related to it. Furthermore, in line with the
new framework, recommendations are listed in the final section of
the report.
Finally, a narrative can also be written at this stage. The purpose
of narrative writing here is to help the reader visualize the sample
1–2 experiences (re-experiencing) through re-contextualization
and reframing.
Limitations and or challenge of proposed model
With its different paradigm, design, and implementation process,
conducting qualitative research has various challenges and
limitations. These challenges and limitations are discussed above.
Within the scope of this model developed through the narrativity,
contextuality, and reflectivity approach, this article has tried to
concretize these approaches, which have been on the agenda
recently, in the context of qualitative data analysis, interpretation,
and reporting and to create a framework in this direction. Since the
approaches are new and offer a different reading, analysis, and
interpretation framework, and therefore the general reader may
not be very familiar with them, there may be extra challenges in

Primary Health Care Research & Development

implantation. However, considering the importance of the
approaches and the fact that this is the first article in this
direction, it is thought that these challenges will be overcome in
time and that the proposed framework/model will become more
useful for the general user with new research and articles in this
direction.
Concluding
Practical guides on the analysis, interpretation, and reporting of
qualitative data are useful tools for researchers who will work in
this area. In this paper, a new framework is proposed based on
contextualization, reflectivity, and narrativity and presented in a
guide format for the evaluation and use of those interested. The
proposal will be improved over time with the feedback of
educational experts and users and will become more useful, thus
contributing to the literature in this way.
Acknowledgements. This model emerged during the analysis processes of two
narrative-designed qualitative studies that I supervised within the scope of the
Doctoral Program in Medical Education. I would like to thank my doctoral
students Merve Saraçoğlu and Selçuk Akturan for their hard work in this
process.
Competing of interests. None.

References
Anderson C (2010) Presenting and evaluating qualitative research. American
Journal of Pharmaceutical Education 74 (8), 141–148.
Ajjawi R, Higgs J (2007) Using hermeneutic phenomenology to investigate
how experienced practitioners learn to communicate clinical reasoning. The
Qualitative Report 12 (4), 612–638.
Bezuidenhout J, van Schalkwyk S (2015) Developing the research question:
setting the course for your research travels. Ch 4: 35-41. In: Cleland J. and
Durning S.J. (Eds). Researching medical education. The association for the
study of medical education. UK, Oxford: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Bleakley A, Cleland J (2015) Sticking with messy realities: how ‘thinking with
complexity’ can inform healthcare education research. Ch 8: 81-91. In:
Cleland J. and Durning S.J. (Eds). Researching medical education. The
association for the study of medical education. UK, Oxford: John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.
Bruner J (1991) The narrative construction of reality. Critical Inquiry 18, (1), 1–
21.
Bruner J (2006) A narrative model of self-construction. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 818 (1), 145–161.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423624000562 Published online by Cambridge University Press

11
Bynum WE, Varpio L, Lagoo J, Teunissen PW (2021) ‘I’m unworthy of being
in this space’: The origins of shame in medical students. Medical Education
55, 185–197.
Charon R (2007) What to do with stories. The sciences of narrative medicine.
Canadian Family Physician 53, 1265–1267.
Cleland J (2015) Exploring versus measuring: considering the fundamental
differences between qualitative and quantitative research. Ch 1: 3-13. IN:
Cleland J. and Durning S.J. (Eds). Researching medical education. The
association for the study of medical education. UK, Oxford: John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.
Cleland J, Durning SJ (Eds) (2015) Researching medical education. The
association for the study of medical education. UK, Oxford: John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.
Creswell JW (2012) Educational Research; Planning, Conducting, and
Evaluating Quantitative and Qualitative Research. 4th ed. Boston: Pearson
Education, Inc.
Creswell JW (2013) Qualitative inquiry and research design: choosing among
five approaches. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE Publications, Inc.
Fenwick T, Nimmo GR (2015) Making visible what matters: sociomaterial
approaches for research and practice in healthcare education. Ch 7: 67-79.
IN: Cleland J. and Durning S.J. (Eds). Researching medical education. The
association for the study of medical education. UK, Oxford: John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.
Gülpınar MA (2021) In search of a new paradigm. The World of Medical
Education 20 (60), 82–100.
Gülpınar MA (2024) Triple approach to program evaluation and “contextual
program evaluation model” proposal. The Educational Review, USA 8 (1),
33–42.
Mann K, MacLeod A (2015) Constructivism: learning theories and approaches
to research. Ch 6: 51-65. In: Cleland J. and Durning S.J. (Eds). Researching
medical education. The association for the study of medical education. UK,
Oxford: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
McMillan W (2015) Theory in healthcare education research: the importance of
worldview. Ch 2: 15-23. In: Cleland J. and Durning S.J. (Eds). Researching
medical education. The association for the study of medical education. UK,
Oxford: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Nardon L, Amrita H (2021) Sensemaking through metaphors: the role of
imaginative metaphor elicitation in constructing new understandings.
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 20, 1–10.
Queirós A, Faria D, Almeida F (2017) Strengths and limitations of qualitative
and quantitative research methods. European Journal of Education Studies
3 (9), 369–86.
Rudd RA, D’Andrea LM (2015) Compassionate detachment: Managing
professional stress while providing quality care to bereaved parents. Journal
of Workplace Behavioral Health 30 (3), 287–305.
Srivastava P, Hopwood N (2009) A practical iterative framework for qualitative
data analysis. International Journal of Qualitative Methods 8 (1), 76–84.

