FORUM: QUALITATIVE
SOCIAL RESEARCH
SOZIALFORSCHUNG

Volume 5, No. 2, Art. 4
May 2004

Remodeling Grounded Theory
Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton
Key words:

Abstract: This paper outlines my concerns with Qualitative Data Analysis' (QDA) numerous re-

grounded theory,

modelings of Grounded Theory (GT) and the subsequent eroding impact. I cite several examples of

qualitative data

the erosion and summarize essential elements of classic GT methodology. It is hoped that the

analysis, constant

article will clarify my concerns with the continuing enthusiasm but misunderstood embrace of GT by

comparative

QDA methodologists and serve as a preliminary guide to novice researchers who wish to explore

method, theoreti-

the fundamental principles of GT.

cal sensitivity
Table of Contents
1. Introduction
2. QDA Blocking of GT
3. Grounded Theory Procedures
3.1 Theoretical sensitivity
3.2 Getting started
3.3 All is data
3.4 Use of the literature
3.5 Theoretical coding
3.6 Open coding
3.7 Theoretical sampling
3.8 Constant comparative method
3.9 Core variable
3.10 Selective coding
3.11 Delimiting
3.12 Interchangeability of indicators
3.13 Pacing
3.14 Memoing
3.15 Sorting and writing up
3.16 Analytic rules developed during sorting
4. Summary
References
Authors
Citation

© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/
Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum: Qualitative Social Research (ISSN 1438-5627)

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

1. Introduction
The difference between the particularistic, routine, normative data we all garner in
our everyday lives and scientific data is that the latter is produced by a
methodology. This is what makes it scientific. This may sound trite, but it is just
the beginning of many complex issues. Whatever methodology may be chosen to
make an ensuing research scientific has many implicit and explicit problems. It
implies a certain type of data collection, the pacing and timing for data collection,
a type of analysis and a specific type of research product. [1]
In the case of qualitative data, the explicit goal is description. The clear issue
articulated in much of the literature regarding qualitative data analysis (QDA)
methodology is the accuracy, truth, trustworthiness or objectivity of the data. This
worrisome accuracy of the data focuses on its subjectivity, its interpretative
nature, its plausibility, the data voice and its constructivism. Achieving accuracy is
always worrisome with a QDA methodology. [2]
These are a few of the problems of description. Other QDA problems include
pacing of data collection, the volume of data, the procedure and rigor of data
analysis, generalizability of the unit findings, the framing of the ensuing analysis
and the product. These issues and others are debated at length in the qualitative
research literature. Worrisome accuracy of qualitative data description continually
concerns qualitative researchers and their audiences. I have addressed these
problems at length in "The Grounded Theory Perspective: Conceptualization
Contrasted with Description" (GLASER, 2001). [3]
In this paper I will take up the conceptual perspective of classic Grounded Theory
(GT). (In some of the research literature, classic GT methodology has also been
termed GLASERian GT although I personally prefer the term "classic" as
recognition of the methodology's origins.) The conceptual nature of classic GT
renders it abstract of time, place and people. While grounded in data, the
conceptual hypotheses of GT do not entail the problems of accuracy that plague
QDA methods. [4]
The mixing of QDA and GT methodologies has the effect of downgrading and
eroding the GT goal of conceptual theory. The result is a default remodeling of
classic GT into just another QDA method with all its descriptive baggage. Given
the ascending focus on QDA by sheer dint of the number of researchers engaged
in qualitative analysis labeled as GT, the apparent merger between the two
methodologies results in default remodeling to QDA canons and techniques.
Conceptual requirements of GT methodology are easily lost in QDA problems of
accuracy, type data, constructivism, participant voice, data collection rigor
according to positivistic representative requirements, however couched in a
flexibility of approach (see LOWE, 1997). The result is a blocking of classic GT
methodology and the loss of its power to transcend the strictures of worrisome
accuracy—the prime concern of QDA methods to produce conceptual theory that
explains fundamental social patterns within the substantive focus of inquiry. [5]
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

I will address some, but not all, of the myriad of remodeling blocks to classic GT
analysis brought on by lacing it with QDA descriptive methodological
requirements. My goal is to alleviate the bane on good GT analysis brought on by
those QDA senior researchers open to no other method, especially the GT
method. I hope to relieve GT of the excessive scientism brought on it by those
worried about accuracy and what is "real" data when creating a scientific product.
I hope to give explanatory strength to those PhD dissertation level students to
stand their GT grounds when struggling in the face of the misapplied QDA
critique by their seniors and supervisors. [6]
I wish to remind people, yet again, that classic GT is simply a set of integrated
conceptual hypotheses systematically generated to produce an inductive theory
about a substantive area. Classic GT is a highly structured but eminently flexible
methodology. Its data collection and analysis procedures are explicit and the
pacing of these procedures is, at once, simultaneous, sequential, subsequent,
scheduled and serendipitous, forming an integrated methodological "whole" that
enables the emergence of conceptual theory as distinct from the thematic
analysis characteristic of QDA research. I have detailed these matters in my
books "Theoretical Sensitivity" (GLASER, 1978), "Basics of Grounded Theory
Analysis" (GLASER, 1992), "Doing Grounded Theory" (GLASER, 1998a), and
"The Grounded Theory Perspective" (GLASER, 2001). [7]
Over the years since the initial publication of "Discovery of Grounded Theory"
(GLASER & STRAUSS, 1967), the transcendent nature of GT as a general
research methodology has been subsumed by the fervent adoption of GT
terminology and selective application of discrete aspects of GT methodology into
the realm of QDA research methodology. This multi-method cherry picking
approach, while obviously acceptable to QDA, is not compatible with the
requirements of GT methodology. [8]
Currently it appears to be very popular in QDA research substantive and
methodological papers to label QDA as GT for the rhetorical legitimating effect
and then to critique its various strategies as somewhat less than possible or
effective; then further, to sanctify the mix of methods as one method. Classic GT
is not what these "adopted QDA" usages would call GT. These researchers do
not realize that while often using the same type of qualitative data, the GT and
QDA methods are sufficiently at odds with each other as to be incapable of
integration. Each method stands alone as quite legitimate. The reader is to keep
in mind that this paper is about GT and how to extract it from this remodeling. It
does not condemn QDA in any way. QDA methods are quite worthy, respectable
and acceptable. As I have said above, the choice of methodology to render
research representations about qualitative data as scientific is the researcher's
choice. But there is a difference between received concepts, problems and
frameworks imposed on data by QDA methods and GT's focus on the generation
and emergence of concepts, problems and theoretical codes. The choice of
methodology should not be confused, lumped or used piecemeal if GT is
involved. To do so is to erode the conceptual power of GT. [9]
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

As such, GT procedures and ideas are used to legitimate and buttress routine
QDA methodology. Considering the inundation, overwhelming and overload of
QDA dictums, "words" and assumed requirements on GT methodology, the
reader will see that it is hard to both assimilate and withstand this avalanche on
GT methodology. The assault is so strong and well meaning that many—
particularly novice researchers—do not know, nor realize, that GT is being
remodeled by default. [10]
The view of this paper is that the researcher who has to achieve a GT product to
move on with his or her career and skill development is often blocked by the
confusion created through this inappropriate mixing of methods and the attendant
QDA requirements thus imposed. Undoing the blocks to GT by this default
remodeling will not be an easy task given the overwhelming confusion that has
resulted and seems destined to continue to grow. [11]
I will deal with as many of the blocks as I see relevant but certainly not all. If I
repeat, it will be from different vantage points to undo QDA remodeling in the
service of advancing the GT perspective. I will hit hard that GT deals with the
data as it is, not what QDA wishes it to be or, more formally, what QDA
preconceives to be accurate and to be forcefully conceptualized. This requires
honesty about taking all data as it comes, figuring it out and then its
conceptualization. I have written at length on "all is data" and on forcing in "Doing
Grounded Theory" (GLASER, 1998a). [12]
As I deal with this escalating remodeling of GT to QDA requirements, my hope is to
free GT up to be as originally envisioned. In "Theoretical Sensitivity" I wrote: "The
goal of grounded theory is to generate a conceptual theory that accounts for a
pattern of behavior which is relevant and problematic for those involved. The goal
is not voluminous description, nor clever verification." (GLASER, 1978, p.93) [13]

2. QDA Blocking of GT
This paper has a simple message. GT is a straightforward methodology. It is a
comprehensive, integrated and highly structured, yet eminently flexible process
that takes a researcher from the first day in the field to a finished written theory.
Following the full suite of GT procedures based on the constant comparative
method, results in a smooth uninterrupted emergent analysis and the generation
of a substantive or formal theory. When GT procedures are laced with the
exhaustive, abundant requirements of QDA methodology, GT becomes distorted,
wasting large amounts of precious research time and derailing the knowledge—
hence grounding—of GT as to what is really going on. The intertwining of GT with
preconceived conjecture, preconceptions, forced concepts and organization,
logical connections and before-the-fact professional interest defaults GT to a
remodeling of GT methodology to the status of a mixed methods QDA
methodology. This leads to multiple blocks on conceptual GT. [14]
The word "analysis" is a catchall word for what to do with data. It is "scientized"
up, down and sideways in QDA methodologies catching up GT analysis in its
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

wake. QDA leads to particularistic analysis based on discrete experiences while
blocking the abstract idea of conceptualizing latent patterns upon which GT is
based. When GT becomes laced with QDA requirements, it is hard to follow to
the point of confusion. Theory development is confused with QDA description
thereby blocking GT generation of conceptual theory. [15]
GT has clear, extensive procedures. When brought into QDA, GT abstraction is
neglected in favor of accuracy of description—the dominant concern of QDA
methodology—and GT acquires the QDA problem of worrisome accuracy—an
irrelevant concern in GT. To repeat, GT methodology is a straightforward
approach to theory generation. To spend time worrying about its place in QDA
methods and science is just fancy, legitimating talk, but the result is the defaulting
of GT to the confusion of QDA analysis. [16]
CRESWELL in his book "Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design" (1998) lumps
GT into comparisons with phenomenology, ethnography, case study and
biographical life history. The result of the lumping is a cursory default remodeling
of GT to a "kind" of QDA. This lumping of GT with other QDA methods prevents
GT from standing alone as a transcending general research methodology. The
criteria of CRESWELL's continuum organize methods according to when theory
is used in research, varying from before the study begins to post-study. By study,
he means data collection and structuring questions. This is a very weak gradation
for discerning the difference among QDA methods and GT methodology.
CRESWELL clearly does not discern the difference between generating theory
from data collection and generating theory that applies to the data once collected.
Both come during and after data collection, but are very differently sourced. The
result is a lumping and confusion of GT with QDA. [17]
CRESWELL (1998, p.86) says:
"At the most extreme end of the continuum, toward the 'after' end, I place grounded
theory. Strauss and Corbin (1990) are clear that one collects and analyzes data
before using theory in a grounded theory study. This explains, for example, the
women's sexually abuse study by Morrow and Smith (1995) in which they generate
the theory through data collection, pose it at the end, and eschew prescribing a
theory at the beginning of the study. In my own studies, I have refrained from
advancing a theory at the beginning of my grounded theory research, generated the
theory through data collection and analysis, posed the theory as a logic diagram and
introduced contending and contrasting theory with the model I generate at the end of
my study (Creswell & Brown 1992, Creswell and Urbom 1997)." [18]

CRESWELL may be stating a fundamental tenant of GT—begin with no
preconceived theory and then generate one during the analysis (unless he meant
applying an extant theory). As a distinguishing item of GT, however, it is barely a
beginning, leaving the reader with no knowledge of how generating is done,
because the assumption is that it is done by routine QDA. Contrasting the
generated theory with extant other theories to prove, improve or disprove one or
the other neglects or ignores constantly comparing the theories for category and
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

property generation. This contrasting with other theories also prevents modifying
the GT generated theory using the other theory as a kind of data. Both constant
comparing and modifying are two vital tenants of GT. [19]
GT may or may not be mentioned in a QDA methodological discussion, but its
procedures frequently are. As such, constant comparative analysis, problem
emergence, theoretical sampling, theoretical saturation, conceptual emergence,
memoing, sorting, etc. become laced with QDA requirements thereby defaulting
their rigorous use to a QDA burden. This virtual subversion of GT results in
complex confusion of an otherwise simple methodology for novice researchers.
The researcher is blocked and no longer freed by the power and autonomy
offered by GT to arrive at new emergent, generated theory. The ability to be
honest about what exactly is the data is consequently distorted by the
unattainable quest for QDA accuracy. For example, Kathryn MAY unwittingly
erodes the GT methodology in QDA fashion when describing the cognitive
processes inherent in data analysis.
"Doing qualitative research is not a passive endeavor. Despite current perceptions
and student's prayers, theory does not magically emerge from data. Nor is it true that,
if only one is patient enough, insight wondrously enlightens the researcher. Rather,
data analysis is a process that requires astute questioning, a relentless search for
answers, active observation, and accurate recall. It is a process of piecing together
data, of making the invisible obvious, of recognizing the significant from the
insignificant, of linking seemingly unrelated facts logically, of fitting categories one
with another, and of attributing consequences to antecedents. It is a process of
conjecture and verification, of correction and modification, of suggestion and defense.
It is a creative process of organizing data so that the analytic scheme will appear
obvious." (MAY, 1994, p.10) [20]

Dr MAY engages in descriptive capture in QDA fashion and attacks the main
tenant of GT, that theory can emerge. She is lost in accurate fact research, which
is moot for GT. She prefers to force the data, making it obey her framework. She
does not acknowledge the constant comparative method by which theory
emerges from all data. Again, GT is defaulted to routine QDA. [21]
Similarly, this PhD student—in her e-mail cry to me for help—wanted to do a GT
dissertation but was caught up in QDA and descriptive capture.
"I need some guidance. I'm on wrong track—I don't care about the main concerns of
clinical social workers in private practice. I care about the main concerns of anyone
attempting to contextualize practice. Maybe the issue is that I'm interested in an
activity regardless of the actor. If I ask these questions I have no doubt that main
concerns will emerge as well as attempts to continually resolve them. This I care about."
(e-mail correspondence, Jan 2002) [22]

She is caught by the QDA approach to force the data for a professional concern.
She wants to use GT procedures in service of a QDA forcing approach, which
defaults GT. GT does not work that way, but the prevalence of QDA would have
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

her think that way. Later, under my guidance, she let the main concern emerge
and did an amazingly good dissertation on binary deconstruction between social
worker and client. [23]
The GT problem and core variable must emerge and it will. I have seen it
hundreds of times. Later, when the GT's main concern emerges and is explained
in a generated theory, it will have relevance for professional concerns. Starting
before emergence with the professional interest, a problem is very likely to result
in research with little or no relevance in GT—just routine QDA description with "as
if" importance. [24]
Here is a good example of extensive lacing of GT by QDA needs. The confusion
of QDA requirements and GT procedures, in this example, makes it hard to follow
and clearly erodes GT by default remodeling.
"Comprehension is achieved in grounded theory by using tape-recorded,
unstructured interviews and by observing participants in their daily lives. However, the
assumption of symbolic interactionism that underlie grounded theory set the stage for
examining process, for identifying stages and phases in the participant's experience.
Symbolic interaction purports that meaning is socially constructed, negotiated and
changes over time. Therefore the interview process seeks to elicit a participant's
story, and this story is told sequentially as the events being reported unfold.
Comprehension is reached when the researcher has interviewed enough to gain indepth understanding." (MORSE, 1994, p.39) [25]

In fact, GT does not require tape-recorded data. Field notes are preferable. GT
uses all types of interviews and, as the study proceeds, the best interview style
emerges. It is not underlined by symbolic interaction, nor constructed data. GT
uses "all as data," of which these are just one kind of data. GT does not
preconceive the theoretical code of process. There are over 18 theoretical coding
families of which process is only one. In GT, its relevance must emerge; it is not
presumed. Interviews lead to many theoretical codes. Participant stories are
moot. Patterns are sought and conceptualized. GT does not search for
description of particularistic accounts. All data are constantly compared to
generate concepts. [26]
MORSE continues her description of GT:
"Synthesis is facilitated by adequacy of the data and the processes of analysis.
During this phase the researcher is able to create a generalized story and to
determine points of departure, of variation in this story. The process of analysis
begins with line-by-line analysis to identify first level codes. Second-level codes are
used to identify significant portions of the text and compile these excerpts into
categories. Writing memos is key to recording insight and facilitates, at an early
stage, the development of theory." (MORSE, 1994, p.39 [27]

It is, indeed, hard to recognize GT procedures in this quote by MORSE.
"Adequacy of data" and a "generalized story" smack of worrisome accuracy and
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

descriptive capture, which are pure QDA concerns. They do not relate to GT
procedures. GT fractures the story in the service of conceptualization. Her
approach to line-by-line analysis is a bare reference to the constant comparative
process, but that is all. Her references to first level, second level codes, portions
of text and compiling excerpts into categories are far from the constant
comparative method designed to generate conceptual categories and their
properties from the outset of data collection and analysis. Writing memos in GT
has to do with immediate recording of generated theoretical conceptual ideas
grounded in data, not the mystical—perhaps conjectural—insights to which
MORSE refers to. [28]
MORSE continues with her description of GT:
"As synthesis is gained and the variation in the data becomes evident, grounded
theorists sample according to the theoretical needs of the study. If a negative case is
identified, the researcher, theoretically, must sample for more negative cases until
saturation is reached when synthesis is attained." (MORSE, 1994, p.39) [29]

Again, finding GT procedures in this description is hard. There is always variation
in the data. GT is concerned with generating a multivariate conceptual theory—
not data variation for QDA. In GT, seeking negative cases is not a procedure.
This is more likely to be preconceived forcing. GT seeks comparative incidents by
theoretical sampling. The purpose in sampling is to generate categories and their
properties. The GT researcher does not know in advance what will be found.
Incidents sampled may be similar or different, positive or negative. MORSE's
reference to saturation does not imply conceptual saturation; rather, it anticipates
simple redundancy without conceptual analysis. [30]
MORSE continues:
"Theorizing follows from the processes of theoretical sampling. Typologies are
constructed by determining two significant characteristics and sorting participants
against each characteristic on a 2x2 matrix. Diagramming is used to enhance
understanding and identifying the basic social process (BSP) that accounts for most
of the variation in the data." (MORSE, 1994, p.39). [31]

Theorizing in GT is an emergent process generated by continuous cycling of the
integrated processes of collecting, coding and conceptual analysis with the
results written up constantly in memos. Theoretical sampling is just one source of
grounding during the constant comparative method. Preconceiving theoretical
codes such as typologies or basic social processes (BSPs) is not GT. In GT,
relevant theoretical codes emerge in conceptual memo sorting and could be
"whatever." While the fourfold property space is a good tool, when emergent, for
conceptualizing types (see GLASER & STRAUSS, "Awareness of Dying," 1965),
it is not for placing or sorting participants, a priori, nor for counting them. This is
strictly routine, preconceived QDA descriptive capture, not GT. [32]

© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

MORSE finishes:
"As with the methods previously discussed, recontextualization is determined by the
level of abstraction attained in the model development. Whereas substantive theory
is context bound, formal theory is more abstract and may be applicable to many
settings or other experiences." (MORSE, 1994, p.34) [33]

This statement is totally wrong for GT, but it addresses the usual QDA quandary
of trying to generalize a description of a unit. In contrast, GT substantive theory
always has general implications and can easily be applied to other substantive
areas by the constant comparative method of modifying theory. For example, by
comparing incidents and modifying the substantive theory of milkmen who
engage in cultivating housewives for profit and recreation, a GT of cultivation can
apply easily to doctors cultivating clients to build a practice, thereby expanding
the original substantive theory to include cultivating down instead of cultivating up
the social scale. Formal theory is generated by many such diverse area
comparisons done in a concerted way to generate a formal theory of cultivating
for recreation, profit, client building, help, donations etc. [34]
Context must emerge as a relevant category or as a theoretical code like all other
categories in a GT. It cannot be assumed as relevant in advance. As one applies
substantive theory elsewhere or generates formal theory, context—when relevant
—will emerge. [35]
These quotes clearly lump GT into the multi-method QDA camp with the result
being default remodeling by erosion of classic GT methodology. Nowhere does
MORSE refer to the GT procedures of delimiting at each phase of generating, of
theoretical completeness, conceptual saturation, core variable analysis, open to
selective coding, memo banks, analytic rules, theoretical sorting, memo piles
writing up, reworking and resorting, emergent problem, interchangeability of
indices and theoretical (not substantive) coding. The effect of such default
remodeling is a great loss of essential GT procedures blocked by the imposition
of QDA worrisome accuracy requirements. [36]
GT requires following its rigorous procedures to generate a theory that fits, works,
is relevant and readily modifiable. When it is adopted, co-opted, and corrupted by
QDA research, a close look at the work often shows that the QDA researcher is
tinkering with the GT method. He or she brings it into a QDA research design to
comply with the strictures and professional expectations of the dominant
paradigm. Getting some kind of product with a few concepts rescues the QDA
research, since the QDA description alone does not suffice. Then, the GT label is
used to legitimate the QDA research. [37]
GT stands alone as a conceptual theory generating methodology. It is a general
methodology. It can use any data, but obviously the favorite data, to date, is
qualitative data. Ergo GT is drawn into the QDA multi-method world and eroded
by consequence, however unwittingly. This revealing of method muddling (see
BAKER, WUEST, & STERN, 1992) of procedures does a tinkering rescue job,
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

but the result is that GT is default remodeled. GT becomes considered, wrongly,
as an interpretative method, a symbolic interaction method, a constructionist
method, a qualitative method, a describing method, a producer of worrisome
facts, a memoing method, an interview or field method and so forth. It is clear that
this tinkering by QDA researchers indicates they are too derailed by QDA to learn
systematic GT procedures. At best, a few GT procedures are borrowed out of
context. [38]
These above authors are typical of many trying to place GT somewhere in the
QDA camp. First they lace it with some QDA requirements and ideas, which they
then use to lump GT into QDA multi-method thought. Lumping GT in as a QDA
methodology simply does not apply and, indeed, blocks good GT while the
default remodeling of GT into another QDA rages on. Lumping erodes GT. In the
remainder of this article, I will try to show how GT stands alone on its own, as a
conceptualizing methodology. My goal will be to bring out the classic GT
perspective on how GT analysis is done—to lay this method bare—and in the
bargain to show how QDA blocks, as I have said, GT generation and product
proof. [39]

3. Grounded Theory Procedures
When not laced and lumped with QDA requirements, GT procedures are fairly
simple. The blocking problems come with the method mixing. I have already
written in detail much about GT procedures in "Discovery of Grounded Theory"
(GLASER & STRAUSS, 1967), "Theoretical Sensitivity" (GLASER, 1978), "Doing
Grounded Theory" (GLASER, 1998a), "Basics of Grounded Theory Analysis
(GLASER, 1992), "More Grounded Theory Methodology" (GLASER, 1994), and
"The Grounded Theory Perspective" (GLASER, 2001), all by Sociology Press. I
have also published many examples of a "good" GT analysis—"Examples of
Grounded Theory" (GLASER, 1993), "Grounded Theory 1984 to 1994" (GLASER,
1995), "Gerund Grounded Theory" (GLASER, 1998b)—and have given many
references in my books. [40]
The GT product is simple. It is not a factual description. It is a set of carefully
grounded concepts organized around a core category and integrated into
hypotheses. The generated theory explains the preponderance of behavior in a
substantive area with the prime mover of this behavior surfacing as the main
concern of the primary participants. I have said over and over that GT is not
findings, not accurate facts and not description. It is just straightforward
conceptualization integrated into theory—a set of plausible, grounded
hypotheses. It is just that—no more—and it is readily modifiable as new data
come from whatever source—literature, new data, collegial comments, etc. The
constant comparative method weaves the new data into the subconceptualization. What is important is to use the complete package of GT
procedures as an integrated methodological whole. [41]
The following is a summary of the essential elements of GT methodology: Bear in
mind, when reading this summary, that the goal of GT is conceptual theory
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

abstract of time, place and people. The goal of GT is NOT the QDA quest for
accurate description. [42]
3.1 Theoretical sensitivity
The ability to generate concepts from data and to relate them according to normal
models of theory in general, and theory development in sociology in particular, is
the essence of theoretical sensitivity. Generating a theory from data means that
most hypotheses and concepts not only come from the data, but are
systematically worked out in relation to the data during the course of the
research. A researcher requires two essential characteristics for the development
of theoretical sensitivity. First, he or she must have the personal and
temperamental bent to maintain analytic distance, tolerate confusion and
regression while remaining open, trusting to preconscious processing and to
conceptual emergence. Second, he/she must have the ability to develop
theoretical insight into the area of research combined with the ability to make
something of these insights. He/she must have the ability to conceptualize and
organize, make abstract connections, visualize and think multivariately. The first
step in gaining theoretical sensitivity is to enter the research setting with as few
predetermined ideas as possible—especially logically deducted, a prior
hypotheses. The research problem and its delimitation are discovered. The preframework efforts of QDA block this theoretical sensitivity. [43]
3.2 Getting started
A good GT analysis starts right off with regular daily data collecting, coding and
analysis. The start is not blocked by a preconceived problem, a methods chapter
or a literature review. The focus and flow is immediately into conceptualization
using the constant comparative method. The best way to do GT is to just do it. It
cannot fail as the social psychological world of structure, culture, social
interaction, social organization etc. goes on irrespective. There always is a main
concern and there always is a prime mover. As an open, generative and
emergent methodology, GT provides an honest approach to the data that lets the
natural organization of substantive life emerge. The GT researcher listens to
participants venting issues rather than encouraging them to talk about a subject
of little interest. The mandate is to remain open to what is actually happening and
not to start filtering data through pre-conceived hypotheses and biases to listen
and observe and thereby discover the main concern of the participants in the field
and how they resolve this concern. The forcing, preconceived notions of an initial
professional problem, or an extant theory and framework are suspended in the
service of seeing what will emerge conceptually by constant comparative
analysis. When QDA requires this preconception, GT is rendered non-emergent
through coding and memoing as the researcher tries to follow a non-emergent
problem. [44]

© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

3.3 All is data
GT stands alone as a conceptual theory generating methodology. It can use any
data, but obviously the favorite data to date is qualitative. While interviews are the
most popular, GT works with any data—"all is data"—not just one specific data. It
is up to the GT researcher to figure out what data they are getting. The data may
be baseline, vague, interpreted or proper-line. The data is not to be discounted as
"subjective," "obvious," "constructed," etc, as we find in QDA critiques. There is
always a perception of a perception as the conceptual level rises. We are all
stuck with a "human" view of what is going on and hazy concepts and
descriptions about it. GT procedures sharpen the generated concepts
systematically. [45]
3.4 Use of the literature
It is critical in GT methodology to avoid unduly influencing the preconceptualization of the research through extensive reading in the substantive
area and the forcing of extant theoretical overlays on the collection and analysis
of data. To undertake an extensive review of literature before the emergence of a
core category violates the basic premise of GT—that being, the theory emerges
from the data not from extant theory. It also runs the risk of clouding the
researcher's ability to remain open to the emergence of a completely new core
category that has not figured prominently in the research to date thereby
thwarting the theoretical sensitivity. Practically, it may well result in the researcher
spending valuable time on an area of literature that proves to be of little
significance to the resultant GT. Instead, GT methodology treats the literature as
another source of data to be integrated into the constant comparative analysis
process once the core category, its properties and related categories have
emerged and the basic conceptual development is well underway. The pre-study
literature review of QDA is a waste of time and a derailing of relevance for the GT
Study. [46]
3.5 Theoretical coding
The conceptualization of data through coding is the foundation of GT
development. Incidents articulated in the data are analyzed and coded, using the
constant comparative method, to generate initially substantive, and later
theoretical, categories. The essential relationship between data and theory is a
conceptual code. The code conceptualizes the underlying pattern of a set of
empirical indicators within the data. Coding gets the analyst off the empirical level
by fracturing the data, then conceptually grouping it into codes that then become
the theory that explains what is happening in the data. A code gives the
researcher a condensed, abstract view with scope of the data that includes
otherwise seemingly disparate phenomena. Substantive codes conceptualize the
empirical substance of the area of research. Theoretical codes conceptualize how
the substantive codes may relate to each other as hypotheses to be integrated
into the theory. Theoretical codes give integrative scope, broad pictures and a
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

new perspective. They help the analyst maintain the conceptual level in writing
about concepts and their interrelations. [47]
3.6 Open coding
It is in the beginning with open coding—and a minimum of preconception—that
the analyst is most tested as to his trust in himself and in the grounded method,
his skill to use the method and his ability to generate codes and find relevance.
The process begins with line-by-line open coding of the data to identify
substantive codes emergent within the data. The analyst begins by coding the
data in every way possible—"running the data open." From the start, the analyst
asks a set of questions—"What is this data a study of?" "What category does this
incident indicate?" "What is actually happening in the data?" "What is the main
concern being faced by the participants?" and "What accounts for the continual
resolving of this concern?" These questions keep the analyst theoretically
sensitive and transcending when analyzing, collecting and coding the data. They
force him/her to focus on patterns among incidents that yield codes and to rise
conceptually above detailed description of incidents. The analyst codes for as
many categories as fit successive, different incidents, while coding into as many
categories as possible. New categories emerge and new incidents fit into existing
categories. [48]
Open coding allows the analyst to see the direction in which to take the study by
theoretical sampling before he/she has become selective and focused on a
particular problem. Thus, when he/she does begin to focus, he/she is sure of
relevance. The researcher begins to see the kind of categories that can handle
the data theoretically, so that he/she knows how to code all data, ensuring the
emergent theory fits and works. Open coding allows the analyst the full range of
theoretical sensitivity as it allows him to take chances on trying to generate codes
that may fit and work. [49]
Line by line coding forces the analyst to verify and saturate categories, minimizes
missing an important category and ensures the grounding of categories the data
beyond impressionism. The result is a rich, dense theory with the feeling that nothing has been left out. It also corrects the forcing of "pet" themes and ideas, unless
they have emergent fit. The analyst must do his/her own coding. Coding constantly
stimulates ideas. The preplanned coding efforts of routine QDA to suit the
preconceived professional problem easily remodel GT by stifling its approach. [50]
3.7 Theoretical sampling
Theoretical sampling is the process of data collection for generating theory
whereby the analyst jointly collects, codes and analyses the data and decides
what data to collect next and where to find them, in order to develop the theory as
it emerges. The process of data collection is controlled by the emerging theory,
whether substantive or formal. Beyond the decisions concerning initial collection
of data, further collection cannot be planned in advance of the emerging theory.
Only as the researcher discovers codes and tries to saturate them by theoretical
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

sampling in comparison groups, do the successive requirements for data
collection emerge—both (1) what categories and their properties to be sampled
further and (2) where to collect the data. By identifying emerging gaps in the
theory, the analyst will be guided as to next sources of data collection and
interview style. The basic question in theoretical sampling is to what groups or
subgroups does one turn to next in data collection—and for what theoretical
purpose? The possibilities of multiple comparisons are infinite and so groups
must be chosen according to theoretical criteria. The criteria—of theoretical
purpose and relevance—are applied in the ongoing joint collection and analysis of
data associated with the generation of theory. As such, they are continually
tailored to fit the data and are applied judiciously at the right point and moment in
the analysis. In this way, the analyst can continually adjust the control of data
collection to ensure the data's relevance to the emerging theory. [51]
Clearly this approach to data collection done jointly with analysis is far different
from the typical QDA preplanned, sequential approach to data collection and
management. Imposing the QDA approach on GT would block it from the start.
[52]
3.8 Constant comparative method
The constant comparative method enables the generation of theory through
systematic and explicit coding and analytic procedures. The process involves
three types of comparison. Incidents are compared to incidents to establish
underlying uniformity and its varying conditions. The uniformity and the conditions
become generated concepts and hypotheses. Then, concepts are compared to
more incidents to generate new theoretical properties of the concept and more
hypotheses. The purpose is theoretical elaboration, saturation and verification of
concepts, densification of concepts by developing their properties and generation
of further concepts. Finally, concepts are compared to concepts. The purpose is
to establish the best fit of many choices of concepts to a set of indicators, the
conceptual levels between the concepts that refer to the same set of indicators
and the integration into hypotheses between the concepts, which becomes the
theory. Comparisons in QDA research are between far more general ideas that
do not lead to tightly grounded categories. [53]
3.9 Core variable
As the researcher proceeds to compare incident to incident in the data, then
incidents to categories, a core category begins to emerge. This core variable,
which appears to account for most of the variation around the concern or problem
that is the focus of the study, becomes the focus of further selective data
collection and coding efforts. It explains how the main concern is continually
resolved. As the analyst develops several workable coded categories, he/she
should begin early to saturate as much as possible those that seem to have
explanatory power. The core variable can be any kind of theoretical code—a
process, a condition, two dimensions, a consequence, a range and so forth. Its
primary function is to integrate the theory and render it dense and saturated. It
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

takes time and much coding and analysis to verify a core category through
saturation, relevance and workability. The criteria for establishing the core
variable within a GT are that it is central, relating to as many other categories and
their properties as possible and accounting for a large portion of the variation in a
pattern of behavior. The core variable reoccurs frequently in the data and comes
to be seen as a stable pattern that is more and more related to other variables. It
relates meaningfully and easily with other categories. It has clear and grabbing
implications for formal theory. It is completely variable and has conceptual carry
through in the emerging theory, enabling the analyst to get through the analyses
of the processes that he/she is working on by its relevance and explanatory
power. Core variable, conceptual theory is far beyond QDA description or
conceptual descriptions which are unending since they are not tied down to a
conceptual scheme. A reversion to QDA clearly blocks this necessary theoretical
completeness. [54]
3.10 Selective coding
Selective coding means to cease open coding and to delimit coding to only those
variables that relate to the core variable in sufficiently significant ways as to
produce a parsimonious theory. Selective coding begins only after the analyst is
sure that he/she has discovered the core variable. QDA researchers have never
figured out the exact purpose and techniques of selective coding. Often they
selectively code from the start with preconceived categories. [55]
3.11 Delimiting
Subsequent data collection and coding is thereby delimited to that which is
relevant to the emergent conceptual framework. This selective data collection and
analysis continues until the researcher has sufficiently elaborated and integrated
the core variable, its properties and its theoretical connections to other relevant
categories. [56]
Integrating a theory around a core variable delimits the theory and thereby the
research project. This delimiting occurs at two levels—the theory and the
categories. First the theory solidifies, in the sense that major modifications
become fewer and fewer as the analyst compares the next incidents of a
category to its properties. Later modifications are mainly on the order of clarifying
the logic, taking out non-relevant properties, integrating elaborating details of
properties into the major outline of interrelated categories and—most important—
reduction. Reduction occurs when the analyst discovers underlying uniformity in
the original set of categories or their properties and then reformulates the theory
with a smaller set of higher-level concepts. The second level of delimiting the
theory is a reduction in the original list of categories for coding. As the theory
grows, becomes reduced, and increasingly works better for ordering a mass of
qualitative data, the analyst becomes committed to it. This allows the researcher
to pare down the original list of categories for collecting and coding data,
according to the present boundaries of the theory. The analyst now focuses on
one category as the core variable and only variables related to the core variable
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

will be included in the theory. The list of categories for coding is further delimited
through theoretical saturation. Since QDA researchers focus on full description,
and no core variable conceptual analysis, delimiting does not occur in QDA
research. It just goes on and on—empirical tiny topics draining both researcher
and audience. [57]
3.12 Interchangeability of indicators
GT is based on a concept-indicator model of constant comparisons of incidents
(indicators) to incidents (indicators) and, once a conceptual code is generated, of
incidents (indicators) to emerging concept. This forces the analyst into
confronting similarities, differences and degrees in consistency of meaning
between incidents (indicators), generating an underlying uniformity which in turn
results in a coded category and the beginnings of properties of it. From the
comparisons of further incidents (indicators) to the conceptual codes, the code is
sharpened to achieve its best fit while further properties are generated until the
code is verified and saturated. [58]
Conceptual specification, not definition, is the focus of GT. The GT conceptindicator model requires concepts and their dimensions to earn their way into the
theory by systematic generation of data. Changing incidents (indicators) and
thereby generating new properties of a code can only go so far before the analyst
discovers saturation of ideas through interchangeability of indicators. This
interchangeability produces, at the same time, the transferability of the theory to
other areas by linking to incidents (indicators) in other substantive or subsubstantive areas that produce the same category or properties of it.
Interchangeability produces saturation of concepts and their properties, not
redundancy of description as some QDA methodologists would have it (see
MORSE, 1995, p.147). [59]
3.13 Pacing
Generating GT takes time. It is above all a delayed action phenomenon. Little
increments of coding, analyzing and collecting data cook and mature and then
blossom later into theoretical memos. Significant theoretical realizations come
with growth and maturity in the data, and much of this is outside the analyst's
awareness until preconscious processing becomes conscious. Thus the analyst
must pace himself, exercise patience and accept nothing until something
happens, as it surely does. Surviving the apparent confusion is important. This
requires that the analyst takes whatever amount of quality time that is required to
do the discovery process and that he/she learns to take this time in a manner
consistent with his/her own temporal nature as an analyst—personal pacing.
Rushing or forcing the process will shut down the analyst's creativity and
conceptual abilities, exhausting the energy and leaving the researcher empty and
the theory thin and incomplete. In QDA work researchers are paced sequentially
through the program and framework, and often driven to long periods of no
product and exhaustion. To overlay this QDA program on GT severely remodels
GT to its deficit. [60]
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

3.14 Memoing
Theory articulation is facilitated through an extensive and systematic process of
memoing that parallels the data analysis process in GT. Memos are theoretical
notes about the data and the conceptual connections between categories. The
writing of theoretical memos is the core stage in the process of generating theory.
If the analyst skips this stage by going directly to sorting or writing up, after
coding, he/she is not doing GT. [61]
Memo writing is a continual process that leads naturally to abstraction or ideation
—continually capturing the "frontier of the analyst's thinking" as he/she goes
through data and codes, sorts and writes. It is essential that the analyst interrupts
coding to memo ideas as they occur if he/she is to reap the subtle reward of the
constant input from reading the data carefully, asking the above questions and
coding accordingly. Memos help the analyst to raise the data to a conceptual
level and develop the properties of each category that begin to define them
operationally. Memos present hypotheses about connections between categories
and/or their properties and begin to integrate these connections with clusters of
other categories to generate the theory. Memos also begin to locate the emerging
theory with other theories with potentially more or less relevance. [62]
The basic goal of memoing is to develop ideas on categories with complete
freedom into a memo fund that is highly sort-able. Memo construction differs from
writing detailed description. Although typically based on description, memos raise
that description to the theoretical level through the conceptual rendering of the
material. Thus, the original description is subsumed by the analysis. Codes
conceptualize data. Memos reveal and relate by theoretically coding the
properties of substantive codes—drawing and filling out analytic properties of the
descriptive data. [63]
Early on memos arise from constant comparison of indicators to indicators, then
indicators to concepts. Later on memos generate new memos, reading literature
generates memos, sorting and writing also generate memos—memoing is never
done! Memos slow the analyst's pace, forcing him/her to reason through and
verify categories and their integration and fit, relevance and work for the theory.
In this way, he/she does not prematurely conclude the final theoretical framework
and core variables. [64]
Comparative reasoning in memos—by constant comparisons—undoes
preconceived notions, hypotheses, and scholarly baggage while at the same time
constantly expanding and breaking the boundaries of current analyses. Memos
are excellent source of directions for theoretical sampling—they point out gaps in
existing analyses and possible new related directions for the emerging theory.
Clearly the preconceived approach and framework of QDA research is in conflict
with the freedom of memoing. The conflict is most often resolved by the
preponderance of QDA research and GT loses this vital aspect. [65]

© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

3.15 Sorting and writing up
Throughout the constant comparative coding process, the researcher has been
capturing the emergent ideation of substantive and theoretical categories in the
form of memos. Once the researcher has achieved theoretical saturation of the
categories, he/she proceeds to review, sort and integrate the numerous memos
related to the core category, its properties and related categories. The sorted
memos generate a theoretical outline, or conceptual framework, for the full
articulation of the GT through an integrated set of hypotheses. [66]
Ideational memos are the fund of GT. Theoretical sorting of the memos is the key
to formulating the theory for presentation or writing. Sorting is essential—it puts
the fractured data back together. With GT, the outline for writing is simply an
emergent product of the sorting of memos. There are no preconceived outlines.
GT generates the outline through the sorting of memos by the sorting of the
categories and properties in the memos into similarities, connections and
conceptual orderings. This forces patterns that become the outline. [67]
To preconceive a theoretical outline is to risk logical elaboration. Instead,
theoretical sorting forces the "nitty gritty" of making theoretically discrete
discriminations as to where each idea fits in the emerging theory. Theoretical
sorting is based on theoretical codes. The theoretical decision about the precise
location of a particular memo—as the analyst sees similarities, connections and
underlying uniformities—is based on the theoretical coding of the data that is
grounding the idea. [68]
If the analyst omits sorting, the theory will be linear, thin and less than fully
integrated. Rich, multi-relation, multivariate theory is generated through sorting.
Without sorting, a theory lacks the internal integration of connections among
many categories. With sorting, data and ideas are theoretically ordered. Sorting is
conceptual sorting, not data sorting. Sorting provides theoretical completeness.
Sorting generates more memos—often on higher conceptual levels—furthering
and condensing the theory. It integrates the relevant literature into the theory,
sorting it with the memos. [69]
Sorting also has a conceptual, zeroing-in capacity. The analyst soon sees where
each concept fits and works, its relevance and how it will carry forward in the
cumulative development of the theory. Sorting prevents over-conceptualization
and pre-conceptualization, since these excesses fall away as analyst zeros in on
the most parsimonious set of integrated concepts. Thus, sorting forces ideational
discrimination between categories while relating them, integrating them and
preventing their proliferation. The constant creativity of sorting memos prevents
the use of computer sorting as used in QDA work. [70]
3.16 Analytic rules developed during sorting
While theoretical coding establishes the relationship among variables, analytic
rules guide the construction of the theory as it emerges. They guide the
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

theoretical sorting and subsequent writing of the theory. Analytic rules detail
operations, specify foci, delimit and select use of the data and concepts, act as
reminders of what to do and keep track of and provide the necessary discipline
for sticking to and keeping track of the central theme as the total theory is
generated. [71]
There are several fundamental analytic rules. First, sorting can start anywhere. It
will force its own beginning, middle, and end for writing. The important thing is to
start. Trying conceptually to locate the first memos will force the analyst to start
reasoning out the integration. Once started, analyst soon learns where ideas are
likely to integrate best and sorting becomes generative and fun. Start with the
core variable and then sort all other categories and properties only as they relate
to the core variable. This rule forces focus, selectivity and delimiting of the
analysis. Theoretical coding helps in deciding and in figuring out the meaning of
the relation of a concept to the core variable. This theoretical code should be
written and sorted into the appropriate pile with the substantive code. Once
sorting on the core variable begins, the constant comparisons are likely to
generate many new ideas, especially on theoretical codes for integrating the
theory. Stop sorting and memo! Then, sort the memo into the integration. [72]
The analyst carries forward to subsequent sorts the use of each concept from the
point of its introduction into the theory. The concept is illustrated only when it is
first introduced to develop the imagery of its meaning. Thereafter, only the
concept is used, not the illustration. All ideas must fit in somewhere in the outline
or the integration must be changed or modified. This is essential for, if the analyst
ignores this fitting of all categories, he/she will break out of the theory too soon
and necessary ideas and relations will not be used. This rule is based on the
assumption that the social world is integrated and the job of the analyst is to
discover it. If he/she cannot find the integration, he/she must re-sort and reintegrate the concepts to fit better. The analyst moves back and forth between
outline and ideas as he/she sorts forcing underlying patterns, integrations and
multivariate relations between the concepts. The process is intensely generative,
yielding many theoretical coding memos to be resorted into the outline. Again it
cannot be done by the simple code and retrieve of computer sorting. [73]
Sorting forces the analyst to introduce an idea in one place and then establish its
carry forward throughout the theory when it is necessary to use it again in other
relations. When in doubt about a place to sort an idea, put it in that part of the
outline where the first possibility of its use occurs, with a note to scrutinize and
pass forward to the next possible place. Theoretical completeness implies
theoretical coverage as far as the study can take the analyst. It requires that, in
cutting off the study, he/she explains with the fewest possible concepts and with
the greatest possible scope, as much variation as possible in the behavior and
problem under study. The theory thus explains sufficiently how people continually
resolve their main concern with concepts that fit, work, have relevance and are
saturated. [74]

© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

4. Summary
Always keep in mind that GT methodology is itself a GT that emerged from doing
research on dying patients in 1967. It was discovered, not invented. It is a sure
thing for researchers to cast their fate with. It was not thought up as a proffered
approach to doing research based on conjectural "wisdoms" from science,
positivism or naturalism. It is not a concoction based on logical "science"
literature telling us how science is ought to be. [75]
GT gives the social psychological world a rhetoric—a jargon to be sure—but one
backed up by systematic procedures. It is not an empty rhetoric, but unfortunately
it often takes time for GT procedures to catch up to rhetoric with "grab." Part of
the delayed learning is the remodeling—hence blocking—by QDA requirements,
especially the accuracy quest. [76]
One promise is that the abstraction of GT from data—generating GT—does away
with the problems of QDA that are "scientized" on and on. As the GT researcher
(especially a PhD student) does GT analysis that produces a substantive,
conceptual theory with general implications—not descriptive findings—he or she
will advisably steer clear of the quicksand of the descriptive problems. QDA
problems are numerous. A short list of these would include accuracy,
interpretation, construction, meaning, positivistic canons and naturalistic canons
of data collection and analysis of unit samples, starting with preconceived
structured interviews right off, sequencing frameworks, preconceived professional
problems, pet theoretical codes, etc and etc. The list is long, the idea is clear. [77]
"Minus mentorees" should be cautious, in their aloneness, about seeking too
much guidance from "one book read" mentors and the intrusive erosion that
results as these mentors try to make sense of GT in their QDA context. They
should seek help from people who have written a GT book. [78]
-----The time for GT to explain and be applied to "what is going on" means leaving the
onslaught of QDA methodologies, which so erode it and then remodel it. Evert
GUMMESSON says it clearly in his recent paper, "Relationship marketing and the
New Economy: it's time for De-Programming" (2002). What GUMMESSON says
about marketing applies equally to nursing, medicine, education, social work and
other practicing professions as well as academic work.
"Today's general textbooks perpetuate the established marketing management epic
from the 1960s with the new just added as extras. It is further my contention that
marketing education has taken an unfortunate direction and has crossed the fine line
between education and brainwashing. The countdown of a painful—but revitalizing—
process of deprogramming has to be initiated.
What do we need in such a situation? A shrink? No, it is less sophisticated than that.
All we need is systematic application of common sense, both in academe and in
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

corporations. We need to use our observational capacity in an inductive mode and
allow it to receive the true story of life, search for patterns and build theory. Yes,
theory. General marketing theory that helps us put events and activities into a
context. This is all within the spirit of grounded theory, wide spread in sociology but
little understood by marketers. My interpretation of a recent book on the subject by
Glaser (2001) is as follows: 'take the elevator from the ground floor of raw
substantive data and description to the penthouse of conceptualization and general
theory. And do this without paying homage to the legacy of extant theory.' In doing
this, complexity, fuzziness and ambiguity are received with cheers by the researchers
and not shunned as unorderly and threatening as they are by quantitative
researchers. Good theory is useful for scholars and practicing managers alike."
(GUMMESSON, 2002, pp.585-586). [79]

I trust that this paper demonstrates how freedom from QDA requirements will
allow unfettered GT procedures to result in generated theory that fulfills
GUMMESSON's vision. [80]

References
Baker, Cynthia; Wuest, Judith & Stern, Phyllis (1992). Method Slurring, The
Phenomenology/Grounded Theory Example, Journal of Advanced Nursing, 17, 1355-1360.
Creswell, John W. (1998). Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Glaser, Barney G. (1978). Theoretical Sensitivity: Advances in the Methodology of Grounded
Theory. Mill Valley, Ca.: Sociology Press.
Glaser, Barney G. (1992). Basics of Grounded Theory Analysis. Mill Valley, Ca.: Sociology Press.
Glaser, Barney G. (Ed.) (1993). Examples of Grounded Theory. A Reader. Mill Valley, Ca.:
Sociology Press.
Glaser, Barney G. (Ed.) (1994). More Grounded Theory Methodology. A Reader. Mill Valley, Ca.:
Sociology Press.
Glaser, Barney G. (Ed.) (1995). Grounded Theory 1984 to 1994. Mill Valley, Ca.: Sociology Press.
Glaser, Barney G. (1998a). Doing Grounded Theory. Issues and Discussions. Mill Valley, Ca.:
Sociology Press.
Glaser, Barney G. with the assistance of W. Douglas Kaplan (Ed.) (1998b). Gerund Grounded
Theory: The Basic Social Process Dissertation. Mill Valley, Ca.: Sociology Press.
Glaser, Barney G. (2001). The Grounded Theory Perspective: Conceptualization Contrasted with
Description. Mill Valley, Ca.: Sociology Press.
Glaser, Barney G. & Strauss, Anselm L. (1965). Awareness of Dying. Chicago: Aldine Publishing
Co.
Glaser, Barney G. & Strauss, Anselm L. (1967). Discovery of Grounded Theory. Mill Valley, Ca.:
Sociology Press.
Gummesson, Evert (2002). Relationship Marketing and the New Economy: It's Time for DeProgramming. Journal of Services Marketing, 16(7), 585-589.
Lowe, Andy (1997). Managing to Post Merger Aftermath-Default Remodeling, Dept of Marketing
University of Strathclyde (Grounded Theory Review).
May, Katharyn A. (1994). Abstract Knowing. The Case for Magic in Method. In Janice Morse (Ed.),
Critical Issues in Qualitative Research Methods (pp.10-22).Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Morse, Janice (1994). "Emerging from the Data." Cognitive Processes of Analysis in Qualitative
Research. In Janice Morse (Ed.), Critical Issues in Qualitative Research Methods (pp.23-41).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Morse, Janice (1995). Editorial. Qualitative Health Review, 5, 147-149.
© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

FQS 5(2), Art. 4, Barney G. Glaser with the assistance of Judith Holton: Remodeling Grounded Theory

Authors
Barney G. GLASER received his BA degree at
Stanford 1952. He studied contemporary literature
for a year at the Sorbonne, University of Paris, and
he spent two years in the army one of which was
in Freiburg, Germany, where he became fluent in
German and studied literature at University of
Freiburg during off-hours. He received his PhD
from Columbia University in 1961. He then went to
University of California San Francisco, where he
joined Anselm STRAUSS in doing the dying in
hospitals study and in teaching PhD students
methods and analysis. He then published his
dissertation as a book "Organizational Scientists:
Their Professional Careers" and published over 20
articles on the subject of professional careers and
the dying research. Then "Awareness of Dying"
was written in 1965 and immediately became a
resounding success. Upon request, GLASER and
STRAUSS wrote the "Discovery of Grounded
Theory" in 1967 to show how the dying research
was done. Another big success! Then followed two
more books on dying and one on chronic illness
and one on status passage with STRAUSS. Since
then GLASER has written 13 more books using
and about grounded theory. Most are now
published by Sociology Press. He has written
countless articles. In 1998 he received an
honorary doctorate from Stockholm University,
Sweden. His works are read throughout the world.

Contact:

Judith HOLTON is Research Development
Consultant at Holland College, Charlottetown, PE,
Canada. She holds a Bachelor of Arts (Dalhousie)
and a Master of Arts (Royal Roads). She is
currently engaged in doctoral research using
grounded theory, as a PhD candidate at University
College Northampton, UK.

Contact:

Barney G. Glaser PhD, Hon PhD
POB 400
Mill Valley, Ca 94942
USA
Tel: 415 388 8431
Fax: 415 381 2254
E-mail: bglaser@speakeasy.net
URL: http://www.groundedtheory.com/

Judith A. Holton
Research Development Consultant
Holland College
140 Weymouth Street
Charlottetown, PE C1A 4Z1
Canada
Tel: 902 566 9607
Fax: 902 566 9629
E-mail: holton@islandtelecom.com

Citation
Glaser, Barney G. with the assistance of Judith Holton (2004). Remodeling Grounded Theory [80
paragraphs]. Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 5(2), Art. 4,
http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0114-fqs040245.
Revised: 4/2011

© 2004 FQS http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/

