Letters to Editor

2.
3.
4.

5.

who.int/ictrp/en. [Last accessed on 2012 Sep 25].
Clinical Trials Registry – India. National Institute of Medical
Statistics (Indian Council of Medical Research). Available from: http://
ctri.nic.in/Clinicaltrials/cont1.php. [Last accessed on 2012 Sep 25].
Paci M, Cigna C, Baccini M, Rinaldi LA. Types of article published in
physiotherapy journals: A quantitative analysis. Physiother Res Int
2009;14:203‑12.
Coronado RA, Riddle DL, Wurtzel WA, George SZ. Bibliometric
analysis of articles published from 1980 to 2009 in physical therapy,
journal of the American Physical Therapy Association. Phys Ther
2011;91:642‑55.
Pandey A, Aggarwal AR, Maulik M, Seth SD. Clinical Trials
Registry‑5. India: Raising the veil. Natl Med J India 2010;23:187‑8.
Access this article online
Quick Response Code:

Website:
www.picronline.org
DOI:
10.4103/2229-3485.115387

Qualitative research
Sir,
Scientific research is based upon finding a solution to a
particular problem one can identify. There are various
methods of formulating a research design for the study. Two
broad approaches of data collection and interpretation in
research are qualitative and quantitative research. The
elementary method of conducting research was quantitative,
but recently, qualitative method of research has also gained
momentum among researchers.
Qualitative research focuses in understanding a research
query as a humanistic or idealistic approach. Though
quantitative approach is a more reliable method as it is based
upon numeric and methods that can be made objectively
and propagated by other researchers. Qualitative method is
used to understand people’s beliefs, experiences, attitudes,
behavior, and interactions. It generates non‑numerical data.
The integration of qualitative research into intervention
studies is a research strategy that is gaining increased attention
across disciplines. Although once viewed as philosophically
incongruent with experimental research, qualitative research
is now recognized for its ability to add a new dimension
to interventional studies that cannot be obtained through
measurement of variables alone.[1] Qualitative research was
initially used in psychological studies when researchers
found it tedious to evaluate human behavior in numeric.
Since then, qualitative research is used in other research
fields as well. In clinical research, qualitative approach can
help view the data more extensively. It strengthens clinical
trials by enhancing user involvement in it.
Perspectives in Clinical Research | July-September 2013 | Vol 4 | Issue 3

Three broad categories of qualitative research of interest
exists in clinical research: Observational studies, interview
studies and documentary/textual analysis of various
written records.[2] Qualitative research gives voice to the
participants in the study.[1] It permits the participants
to share their experiences of the effects of the drug of
interest. This can open our eyes to new aspects of the
study and help modify the design of the clinical trial.
Qualitative study enhances the involvement of everyone
related to the study. The researcher works on the social
parameters in addition to the quantitative measures in the
study. The subjects also have an empowering experience
in the study. They have an active role in the study and can
voice their individual benefits and harms of the study.
In addition, with qualitative methods, the relationship
between the researcher and the participant is often less
formal than in quantitative research.
Qualitative research can have a major contribution in
health research. In clinical trials, qualitative research can
have a great impact on data collection, its analysis and
the interpretation of results. Qualitative studies should
be well‑designed and the aims, procedures of the study
should be meticulously adjudicated. Study should have
pre‑determined methods to nullify research bias. When
combined with quantitative measures, qualitative study can
give a better understanding of health related issues. The
perspectives in clinical research should highlight advances
in qualitative research as well, to optimize quality and utility
of this method of research.
Vibha Pathak, Bijayini Jena1, Sanjay Kalra2
Departments of Clinical Research, 1Nutrition, and 2Endocrinology,
Bharti Hospital and BRIDE, Karnal, Haryana, India
Address for correspondence:
Dr. Sanjay Kalra,
Bharti Hospital and BRIDE, Karnal, Haryana, India.
E‑mail: brideknl@gmail.com

REFERENCES
1.
2.

Gibson G, Timlin A, Curran S, Wattis J. The scope for qualitative methods
in research and clinical trials in dementia. Age Ageing 2004;33:422‑6.
Pope C, Mays N. In: Mays N, Pope N, editors. Qualitative Methods
in Health and Health Services Research. London, BMJ: Qualitative
Research in Health Care; 1996.
Access this article online
Quick Response Code:

Website:
www.picronline.org
DOI:
10.4103/2229-3485.115389

192

