Article

Qualitative Research in the Digital Era: Obstacles and Opportunities
Ted Palys, PhD
Professor
School of Criminology
Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada
Chris Atchison, MA
Research Associate
Department of Sociology
University of Victoria
Victoria, British Columbia, Canada
© 2012 Palys and Atchison.

Abstract
Although the many sites and opportunities available to researchers through the development
and proliferation of the Internet are well known, little attention has been paid to what digital
technologies and the world’s developing digital infrastructure can offer qualitative
researchers for the actual process of doing research. This article discusses opportunities that
now exist that we have experimented with and implemented in our own research, such as
viral sampling strategies, wireless interviewing, and voice recognition transcription, as well
as impediments we have encountered that stand in their way. Included in the latter are
research ethics boards who often lack expertise in issues that arise in computer-assisted
research, hardware/software costs and technological expertise for researchers, and university
administrations who have not embraced infrastructure for qualitative research to the same
extent they have supported quantitative research. The article closes with a look at the
implications of emerging issues, such as the trend to cloud computing, the proliferation of
mobile devices, and the maturation of voice recognition software.
Keywords: Computer-assisted, qualitative, viral sampling, voice recognition, ethics,
information management, CAQDA, NVivo
Author Note: An earlier version of this article was presented as a keynote address at the
10th Annual Advances in Qualitative Methods Conference of the International Institute for
Qualitative Methodology held in Vancouver in October, 2009. The authors thank those in
attendance for their comments and questions.

352

International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)

This article emerges from the intersection of two domains: (a) qualitative research, with all its
diverse and illustrious history, and (b) the digital age, which is now most clearly upon us. While
others have already considered the many research sites and opportunities that are now available to
researchers through the development and proliferation of the Internet (e.g., Atchison, 1999;
Bainbridge, 1999; Bauman, Airey, & Atak, 1998; Couper, Traugott, & Lamias, 2001; Palys &
Atchison, 2008), little attention has been paid to what digital technologies and the world’s
developing digital infrastructure can offer qualitative researchers in the actual process of doing
research. This article will address this issue by describing some of the ways that qualitative
researchers can incorporate digital technologies into their work. Our focus is on the opportunities
that the digital age offers as well as some of the impediments we have encountered that keep us
from fully embracing those opportunities.
These observations bring together three elements: (a) digital technologies and the many
opportunities they provide both to do new things that the qualitative research community has
never done before, as well as to do better the things that it has always done; (b) the social
dynamics that have been triggered, fostered, and fed by digital developments, most notably the
colonization of the Internet, and the implications these have for sampling and solicitation; and (c)
observations regarding some possible implications of these social and technological
developments for qualitative research in the academy.
Opportunities and Efficiencies in Research
The Over-Arching Challenge: Information Management
At this point it would be hard to deny that many aspects of the research process that were
formerly accomplished through more conventional approaches are becoming increasingly
difficult to manage. The explosion of digital publication and e-holdings in many libraries, the
growing popularity of interdisciplinary and multi-member research projects that can span
institutions and even continents, and the noted impact of virtual colonization has had a huge
impact on the way we manage information in the process of designing and conducting research.
Our approach has involved trying to move out of our comfort zone and to look for applications of
technology that are useful at each stage of the research process. In doing this, we have found that
many existing technologies are underutilized because of an overly narrow conceptualization of
what they do. A classic example of this is NVivo, a well-known software program that is
generally considered to be useful for the analysis of qualitative data. But its potential is far more
than that. We construe NVivo as more of an information management tool that can be useful
throughout the research process.
The planning stages of a project are often the time when information management is most
important. The ubiquity of the portable document format (PDF) journal articles, the growth of
online publications, and the dissolution of linguistic, cultural, and geographic borders that
previously placed limitations on access to globally produced knowledge have made the
management of information during the literature review, proposal writing, and research design
process increasingly challenging. At the outset any literature one accesses can be imported into a
NVivo project, and sophisticated and almost error-free optical character recognition (OCR)
software programs such as Abbyy Fine Reader, OmniPage, or Readirus, can make any imagebased document both searchable and codable. This is immediately useful for literature review and
proposal writing, and continues through the research design, data gathering, and analysis stages—
where NVivo’s flexibility for many different sources of data (including audio, video, graphic, and
text) are well known—of writing for publication. And one does not even need to be a qualitative
353

International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)

researcher or engaged in qualitative research to reap the benefits. In our own departments, for
example, PhD students of all stripes are recognizing what a useful tool NVivo can be for
managing the literature when they are preparing for comprehensive examinations and writing
papers and proposals.
The Colonization of the Internet
We use the term “colonized” to convey that the Internet has seen the creation of places that
individuals and groups have marked and settled for their own social purposes. Rather than refer
merely to “settlement,” saying the Internet has been “colonized” acknowledges that settlement
patterns have reflected the particular gendered, cultural, economic, and political interests of
divergent hegemonic groups. Stated more simply, the Internet has fostered, more than any
technology before it, the growth of social networks and the realization of an ever-growing
number of “global villages” (see McLuhan, 1962, 1964) that represent a diversity of interests
among members, and there is ample evidence that there is a growing will among some to control
the shape and regulation of these emergent communities (Atchison, 2000; Atchison & Thomas,
2000). Although explaining the dynamics of this colonization process is beyond the scope of our
article, recognizing that it is happening is a prerequisite to understanding some of the
methodological implications that flow from it.
During the initial settlement of the Internet, virtual communities of like-minded people
congregated using utilities such as Usenet (newsgroups), Internet Relay Chat (IRC), e-lists, and
bulletin board systems (BBSs). Often global in composition, the members of those early virtual
villages were typically weakly tied because of the realities of physical geography. Physically
remote, single-interest bonds can be difficult to sustain, and few of us have access to the
resources required to develop those relationships in person.
The first graphical web browser in 1993, and the accompanying wide-scale release of Netscape
Navigator in 1994, along with the growth of commercial Internet Service Providers (ISPs), led to
an explosion in the public use of the World Wide Web (WWW or the Web). This new graphical
user interface (GUI) in turn led to the creation of Internet forums or message boards, which
rapidly replaced Usenets, e-lists, and BBSs as the preferred medium for members of virtual
villages to meet and communicate. While instant messaging technology had always existed in the
form of IRC, the new GUI interface made this form of online communication even more
appealing to a wider array of network technology users. The relative ease with which these
forums could be set up, maintained, and used by anyone with storage space provided by their
Internet Service Provider (ISP), combined with the emergence of meta-search engines such as
Alta Vista, allowed growing numbers of people with access to the Web to migrate to and settle in
virtual communities that were even more reflective of their particular social, political, economic,
or geographic background, interests, and beliefs.
Two distinct processes were evident. First, the boundaries between “virtual” and “real”
communities began to overlap as networks of individuals who were already part of “real world”
friendship cliques or networks began to bond and interact with people of shared interests they met
through their participation in these newly forming virtual communities. The local bridge club or
Little League Baseball organization could share information not only among its local members,
but also could network with similar groups elsewhere.
At the same time, some virtual communities that had been created on the basis of a more generic
common interest grew to the point where the sheer size of the interest group made it both feasible
and useful to organize on a more local basis. For example, while the Internet initially allowed
354

International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)

relatively smaller numbers of men who were the clients of prostitutes (“johns”) to connect
nationally and internationally with others who shared their general interest, the growth of the
Internet made it feasible for groups of johns to establish geographically-linked sites that allowed
them to engage in conversation not only about broader issues involving prostitution, but also to
exchange consumer-based information about local prices and services.
The demographic that appeared to be most receptive to this emergent form of communication was
the younger generation of Internet users, many of whom were born only a few years before the
introduction of the first GUI web browser. The more recent dawn of social networking and
content sharing websites such as Facebook, Pinterest, and personal blogs, “notification”
technologies such as Twitter, and the explosion in popularity of short message services (SMS), or
text messaging, has resulted in yet another transformation in the ongoing process of virtual
colonization. People are now able to connect, interact, and share resources with existing friends,
as well as maintain ties with former friends and other contacts who are no longer a part of their
current lives “offline.” Wireless network devices—such as the iPhone, Blackberry, and phones
using Google’s Android OS—have made it even easier to connect with a wide variety of strongly
and weakly tied members of an individual social network or community because of these devices’
portability, ease of use, and removal of barriers from information flow between people no matter
the distance.
As a result, the Internet is now occupied by varying groups of people, including those in a highly
dispersed physical space and others locally accessible, occasionally bridging online and offline
relationships while at other times remaining within one or the other, and in some situations
engaging in real time, while in others transcending it. Understanding this variation, and how
different cultural and subcultural groups and networks use these virtual spaces to create and
define their social identities, is a prerequisite for qualitative researchers hoping to benefit from
the accessibility of these meeting spaces. Although much of this understanding has yet to be
developed, we can in the interim at least start this dialogue by sharing some of our own research
experiences.
Implications for Sampling
The possibility of using social network sites as sources of data is well known (e.g., Boyd &
Ellison, 2008; De Bruyn & Lilien, 2004; Zimmer, 2010), but their potential utility for participant
recruitment is not. In this regard, we have found the sorts of networks created by social
networking sites can be extremely useful in acquiring samples, even among, and sometimes
particularly among, marginalized, stigmatized, or otherwise socially isolated persons who have
sought to connect with others in virtual space. Atchison, for example, has taken advantage of
network communications technologies, such as text messaging, online discussion boards, and
social networking sites (e.g., Facebook and Twitter), to develop recruitment strategies that build
on the fact that modern network technology and communications are designed explicitly for the
rapid transmission of information among and between members of distinct social networks (for a
more detailed discussion see Kolar & Atchison, 2012).
In order to acquire a sample of clients of sex workers, a notoriously difficult population to locate
and engage, Atchison employed a targeted-network recruitment strategy that involved
approaching members of the community directly through advertisements placed within a variety
of region- and topic-specific online newsgroups that sex buyers used to locate sexual service
providers. The wording of the advertisements was phrased in such a way so as to highlight the
importance of the research “giving voice” to this group of stigmatized individuals whose views
had rarely, if ever, been sought. One particular advertisement read:
355

International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)

We appreciate that in an ideal world people who buy sex would be in a position to stand
up and have their voices included in debates surrounding prostitution without fear of
moral, social, legal or political persecution or prosecution; we recognize that in the world
we currently live in this is rarely the case. We see this research as providing a chance for
people who have paid for sex to be included in discussions that they have been excluded
from for far too long—without having to fear that their safety, privacy, confidentiality or
anonymity will be compromised in any way. If you are interested in finding out more
about this important research project visit us on the web at www.johnsvoice.ca
In order to get the word out to potentially interested parties, Atchison posted a total of 450
advertisements using variations of the above wording over the duration of the project. Posting
frequency was based on priority and traffic levels with the higher frequency areas of Vancouver,
Toronto, and Montreal comprising 34.22% (n=154) of the posts made (an average of about 51
posts per area). The medium frequency areas of Calgary, Edmonton, and Ottawa accounted for
13.33% (n=60) of the posts (an average of about 20 posts per area). Finally, the 29 lower
frequency areas (e.g., Victoria, Hamilton, Winnipeg, and Red Deer) accounted for the remaining
52.44% (n=236) of posts (an average of about 8 posts per area). This method of recruitment
generated 72.6% (n=584) of questionnaire participants and produced 35 telephone or email
inquiries about the research. Sixteen of these people ended up participating in more intensive
follow-up interviews, accounting for 64% of interview participants.
Since at least “Doc’s” legendary introduction of William Foote Whyte (1943) to the street corner
boys, network sampling techniques have, until now, relied on some form of face-to-face contact
between the researcher and at least one participant or informant who agrees to vouch for or go
forward on behalf of the researcher to recruit members of their social network for participation
(e.g., see Lofland, Snow, Anderson, & Lofland, 2006). For his web-centered project on the clients
of sex workers, Atchison developed a second network-based sampling strategy that he refers to as
“viral recruitment.” Viral recruitment does not require the researcher to first identify and contact
a member of the target population. Instead, this strategy requires that the researcher only know
“how” to target the population and to construct a solicitation that appeals to them. Once a trusted
member of the community deems the advertisement important or interesting, its transfer to further
members of the community is exponential.
In Atchison’s case, the targeting of sex buyers came through identification of geographicallybased networking sites catering to the interests of members of the sex-buying and -selling
communities. There are currently seven such discussion boards in Canada with a collective
membership of more than 220,000 people. While not all of these members are active, and some
individuals are members of multiple boards (as was the case with the principal researcher for the
purpose of this study), even if every individual member was a member of all seven forums, there
would still be over 31,000 unique members.
Monitoring of the sites’ discussion boards over time revealed these virtual communities form
around specific subcultural communities of buyers and sellers that are defined by their status (as a
buyer or seller of sex), their venue experience or preference (e.g., street, escort, independent, and
parlour), and their geographic location (major Canadian cities). Some members of the network
have formed friendship cliques that engage in regular social interactions that sometimes extend
beyond the boundaries of the virtual community to real world meetings over beer or attendance at
annual community parties. Despite the strong ties that have developed among some members of
the network, the majority of members appear to be peripherally related to these cliques through
occasional participation in group conversations or chats, or through their interaction over the
sharing of their sex-buying or -selling experiences.
356

International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)

In order to employ his viral recruitment strategy, Atchison informally analyzed the postings that
community members had placed in the various publicly accessible discussion board threads in
order to identify both conventional (e.g., newspapers, tabloids, or periodicals) and network-based
(e.g., websites and newsgroups) media spaces that active online community members utilized.
Once he identified these spaces, he arranged to post variations of the same advertisements that he
placed in the commercial newsgroup spaces in the hopes that members would learn about the
research and then pass this knowledge back to the community. The strategy proved to be quite
successful, producing 21.6% of his participants for a web-based survey (n=174) and 16% (n=4)
of his interview participants. Participants who came across information about the survey quickly
posted messages about the research in the various discussion forums and these posts resulted in
conversational “threads” where members of the community shared their thoughts about the
“legitimacy” of the research and their desire to participate.
There is of course a potential downside to this more passive bait-and-wait technique, which is that
while a single positive statement by a significant group member may be helpful in viral
transmission of the researcher’s appeal, a single negative one can undermine the study in that
forum. In this regard, monitoring of discussions at the site made clear that just as Atchison had
used the Internet to his advantage in order to locate the group and engage them as the launching
point for his appeal, so, too, did the participants employ their online savvy to find out more about
him. Extensive searching led listserv members to the conclusion that Atchison was fair-minded
and was providing a legitimate and unbiased opportunity. For example, one community member
posted a message back to the community that stated,
I looked at the names of some of the people associated with the project (ain't Google
wonderful!) and they have a number of legitimate research studies and analyses out there.
As well, some have been involved in harm reduction strategies with the sex worker
community and some have expertise in criminal justice issues. In a phrase, ‘looks legit to
me.’
The intensity of prospective participants’ search should serve as a reminder to researchers that
they should be careful about their online persona, and that they should expect their behaviour and
reputation to come under critical scrutiny. The doors to the Internet open both ways.
Data Gathering
Intranet- and Internet-Based Techniques
Although perhaps of less interest to persons who engage solely in traditional qualitative research,
those who engage in mixed-methods research also may be interested to know about some of the
possibilities we have pursued in the realm of intranet- and Internet-based survey research.
Although Internet-based surveys have become more common, we have yet to see anyone making
creative use of the advantages that computer-based techniques bestow. Virtually every web-based
survey we have seen has involved little more than taking what would have been on a white piece
of paper and placing it on a screen.
In contrast, we start with a design process that ensures the look of the survey is appealing to the
audience we seek. The computer also allows you to offer questions in virtually any form—we
have experimented with having questions in text, audio, and video—and, depending on the
hardware, to enable responses by text, audio, video, or touch, and thereby surveys can be adapted
to virtually any category of population, including the illiterate and those who have any number of
visual or motor impairments. In-person or purely computer-administered surveys also can be
357

International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)

prepared in any language, with language of administration changed at the click of a button, voice
command, or touch, for use in multi-cultural and international research.
Computer-based surveys also simplify contingency questions by allowing internal links from
particular responses to whichever option most appropriately follows, thereby negating any
possibility for respondent or researcher/administrator error by programming contingency
sequences seamlessly and invisibly into the administration process. We also have begun
incorporating what might be termed “adaptive” questioning where key words from responses
earlier in the survey are incorporated into the wording of relevant subsequent questions, thereby
enhancing user friendliness. These can mirror the sorts of processes that effective interviewers
would use (e.g., see Palys & Atchison, 2008). For example, a survey that included questions
about sexual behaviour might ask early in the process what word or phrase the respondent would
prefer to use when describing sexual intercourse, and from that point on any question that dealt
with intercourse could incorporate the respondent’s preference into its wording.
Our examination of existing web-based survey programs and sites and every particular survey
that has been brought to our attention also shows that such sites and surveys offer little or no
opportunity for the more open-ended responses that would be of special interest to qualitative
researchers, and that they appear to treat “data collection” and “data analysis” as two separate
processes with no bridge between them. In contrast, as outlined elsewhere (see Palys & Atchison,
2008), the surveys we create typically include both structured/categorical and less structured
open-ended questions and are designed using scripting that makes them easily downloadable to
SPSS, NVivo, and/or Excel. This in itself creates savings and efficiencies by minimizing
transcription time and the errors that would otherwise inevitably accompany that process.
Interactive Techniques
While the role that a capable interviewer or observer plays in the quality of data gathered can
never be overstated, a tremendous advantage that digital technologies offer the data-gathering
process is their ability to free up more research time by increasing comfort, maximizing
efficiency, and minimizing error. For example, the tape recorder has always been a tool sine qua
non for qualitative researchers, and the contemporary digital recorder is no less. But, instead of
the tape recorder sitting in the middle of a table with a microphone pointing intrusively toward
the participant, we have begun using two-way radio transmitter-receivers and digital recording
devices where both interviewer and interviewee are equipped with a microphone and transmitter
that attaches inconspicuously to a lapel or shirt collar.
Atchison had an opportunity to use this technique most recently in his in-person interviews with
clients of sex workers, which allowed him to conduct interviews in true conversational style in
pool halls, moderately busy lounges or cafes, or while walking about busy city streets. Not having
the visual distraction of the recording device present, not having to worry about being restricted
spatially, and not having any obvious hardware that would draw third-party attention as if an
“Interview in Progress” sign were hanging about their necks, combined to put participants at ease,
which made it much easier to establish a trust and rapport that resulted in the typical interview
lasting well over 2 hours. Participants often commented at the end of the session how enjoyable
the conversation was and how much they appreciated being able to talk so openly and freely.
The mobility associated with this approach also allows for interviews to be conducted in situ
where research participants have visual cues they can use as they explain how particular events
occurred and/or explain their behaviour or choices, which we speculate will enhance both the
comprehensiveness of recall and its validity. For example, we recently advised a publishing
358

International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)

business in the health food industry that was undertaking in-house interview research with health
food retailers regarding various aspects of the industry. Our advice included the suggestion that
the interviews should be conducted in the actual store using wireless microphones while
wandering about the venue. The feedback was highly positive. Retailers clearly felt more
comfortable showing off and explaining “their” store, while the interviewer enjoyed having both
concrete referents to anchor what was being spoken about and the ability to point to and ask about
product, store features, and other issues that came to the interviewer’s or retailer’s attention.
As anyone knows who has seen a teenager speedily texting with both thumbs on their cell phone,
there appears to be a preference among some members of the current generation of computer
users to communicate via chat-direct or text messaging. Nevertheless, we do not recommend it in
the research/interview context. The single computer-assisted on-line interview (CAOI) that was
conducted in Atchison’s sex-client project was perhaps the most challenging and time-consuming
of all the interviews. Unlike in person or telephone interviews, with the CAOI it was quite
difficult to establish a clear sense of trust and rapport, and it was extremely difficult to obtain the
same naturalness of conversation that produced such rich and thoughtful commentary in the other
interview settings. In the end, while this interview did result in lengthy and well-articulated
responses by the participant, and as a helpful by-product generated a comprehensive transcript of
the interaction, it took nearly seven hours over the course of two evenings to complete. The
equivalent amount of time spent in an in-person or telephone interview probably would have
yielded a much more detailed and comprehensive account. Conversely, the same content could
have been covered face-to-face in a quarter of the time. We also have concerns about
confidentiality issues when sensitive information is being transmitted via text, and would feel
more comfortable conducting the interview via Skype (using audio only or with video). The
participant was informed of these options and their respective advantages and disadvantages for
him; however, in the end he would not have consented to the interview at all if the CAOI was not
an option.
Transcription
Once gathered, the next challenge awaiting the qualitative researcher is to get the material
assembled into codable form. In the case of interviews, this traditionally has meant transcribing,
which has often been described as the most labour-intensive part of the process, with one
interview hour normally taking anywhere from 4 to 6 hours or more to transcribe. This becomes
an extremely time-consuming and expensive task in any larger scale study.
In our own work we have begun experimenting with automated transcription processes using
voice recognition software. The program we use is called Dragon Naturally Speaking (DNS),
which is generally recognized as one of the top voice recognition programs available. Other
popular commercial and open source voice recognition software applications include IBM
ViaVoice, MacSpeech, Microsoft Windows Speech Recognition, Philips SpeechMagic, Sphinx,
and VoxForge. For those unfamiliar with the program, DNS, once installed, requires a brief
training process in which the user reads standard passages for approximately 15 minutes. The
brief training process trains both the researcher and the program—the researcher to speak in a
manner that is most recognizable to the program and the program to recognize the researcher’s
unique speech—and is remarkably accurate once trained. This can be supplemented with other
user-generated material such as documents, which allows the researcher to introduce vocabulary
that is unique to his/her interests and research. For example, Palys does face-to-face and legal
research with Indigenous peoples whose traditional tribal, place, and personal names are far
beyond the program’s default capability, but can be produced unerringly by DNS with a few
minutes of training. The same would be true of any technical vocabulary.
359

International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)

Our first experiment using DNS for transcription involved simply inputting a taped interview to
the program for transcription. This yielded a highly error-filled copy that required almost as much
time to edit as traditional transcription would have taken. Our next step was to exploit the fact
that the program knew each of our voices by making us the medium through which the interview
was taken from digitized audio file to transcript. This involved wearing headphones, slowing the
tape down by 20-30% (using another program such as the freely available Express Scribe, the
commercially available Adobe Soundbooth, or the playback provisions in NVivo), and then
speaking out what we heard into DNS as the recording played. Because this process used our own
voices, which had already been trained in the program, the error rate was trivial and easily edited
with only a few interviews for practice. We found the total time taken dropped from 4-6 hours of
transcription time for 1 hour of interview to about 1.5 hours of transcription time, which was a
substantial time saving.
Another option would be to actually begin or end an interview by putting the respondent through
the training process, the basic version of which only takes about 15 minutes. While such sessions
would not be particularly useful or feasible for single-interview studies, even when each
interview lasts for more than an hour, they may be highly useful for something like an oral history
project where a given participant is sometimes interviewed for dozens of hours. Any digital
recordings then could be input into DNS and auto-transcribed. Because some training of the
program already will have occurred, accuracy will be high from the start. By correcting errors
from the first interview, and thereby further training the program, subsequent accuracy will be
even higher.
Yet another more promising option with which we have only begun to experiment is the batch
conversion of digital recordings into a single voice file for the purposes of automated
transcription. In this process, sophisticated audio software such as Adobe Soundbooth is used to
apply a series of specially designed sound filters to digitally recorded files. During the first stage
of this process, a filter is applied to remove all ambient noise from the recording that may have
been present during the initial interview. In the second stage, a special filter is then applied in
order to change the pitch and tone of all voices present in the recording into a single voice. Once
the voice is converted, a third filter is applied to the new voice to slow down the rate of speech to
20-30% of the original rate so that the speech is clean and methodical. The final version of the
file can then be auto-transcribed using the DNS batch transcription feature.
Data Analysis
This is another area where much has been written and where software such as NVivo and
ATLAS.ti clearly market themselves (Auld et al., 2007; Crowley, Harre, & Tagg, 2002; Durian,
2002; Lewis, 2004; Smyth, 2006). While we will not comment on what programmes like NVivo
and ATLAS.ti can do, we would like to observe that these programmes are in their relative
infancy and companies like QSR (the parent of NVivo) are actively working with members of the
qualitative and mixed methods research community (academic and commercial alike) to build
features into the next generation of these programmes that reflect the needs and applications of
those who could benefit from the use of this software.
Methodological Caveats
We have focussed on opportunities first, and hope they have opened readers’ eyes to some
possibilities that digital technologies can generate in their research. But there are other
considerations that arise from exploiting the technologies and techniques we have outlined that
represent a potential downside or disadvantage for incorporating these digital interventions. These
360

International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)

disadvantages fall into three main categories: (a) start-up issues, (b) ethical issues, and (c)
academic and institutional support.
Start-up
There are two key aspects to start-up. The first is the hardware and software required to engage in
the various practices we have described. The second is the expertise required to run that hardware
and software.
In the grander scheme of things, hardware and software costs are not unreasonable, but neither
are they inexpensive. We each own several desktop computers and laptops and prefer to work
using multiple monitors, and then there are the microphones, radio transmitters, and web and data
servers. Software is probably the most expensive element of the equation; we have mentioned
several in passing—NVivo, Adobe Soundbooth, Dragon Naturally Speaking, Abbyy Fine
Reader—which can total several thousand dollars, even with educational pricing. While the solo,
largely self-funded researcher is likely to take some time to accumulate these tools, those who
engage in larger projects should be able to write in such purchases fairly easily; they would be a
relatively small line item on any half-million dollar budget. Indeed, we would hope that an article
such as this one would help make it easier to justify these purchases by showing how much they
can facilitate and gain efficiencies throughout the research process. It also should be noted that
there are a wealth of open-source shareware and freeware software solutions available to those
with the desire to implement technology into the research process, but who do not have the
financial resources to invest immediately.
The bigger issue is likely whether the interested reader has the expertise, or has access to the
expertise, to actually run all these programs and servers and equipment. We might be seen as an
interesting case study in that regard, and probably represent the two major groups who might
consider our suggestions. Atchison is the clear alpha technophile and the one who is typically the
first to try out any new technology. Palys is also a technophile insofar as interest and educability
go, but does not possess Atchison’s level of expertise in being able to do the scripting and
programming required to make them run. Not everything requires servers and scripting, and Palys
has the main prerequisite of being willing and educable on the use of new software. Neither of us
has a degree in computing science; both are self-taught.
Realistically, we presume and hope that some more adventurous and tech-savvy and/or
financially independent readers of this document will start to experiment with the software and
hardware they have, push their boundaries a bit further, and write follow-ups to this article that
help create a bourgeoning inventory of tricks and tips that will bring computer-assisted qualitative
research into the 21st century. Although the situation at the moment would seem to favour those
who are more advanced technologically—writing scripts and setting up and operating servers are
not within most researchers’ range of expertise, creating the demand for future development is
crucial, and if prior development patterns are at all predictive, technologies once considered
esoteric can become user friendly and mainstream very quickly.
Palys cut his academic teeth in the days of mainframes, and he is one of those who took his
dissertation data to the computing centre in boxes full of 80-character IBM punch cards. These
first versions of what was then an esoteric program called SPSS were themselves leagues ahead
of the rooms full of mechanical calculators that he had been trained on as an undergraduate, and
were at that time considered the province of the adventurous. Similarly, web pages once required
designers to be proficient in scripting html. WYSIWYS (what you see is what you get) html
editing programs such as CoffeeCup, FirstPage, Front Page, GoLive, HotDog, and Dreamweaver
361

International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)

soon came along to “do” html invisibly with a point-and-click interface that made every user a
possible web designer. Qualitative researchers are now at that similar ground level of digital
development and are thus in a position to promote and influence its development.
Ethical Issues
Because we have not addressed the various new venues for research that have been made possible
by the Internet, we will not discuss the many ethical issues that arise, and have already been
discussed, such as where the dividing line is between “public” and “private” on the Internet and
what “netiquette” is involved when approaching and interacting with various social networking
groups (but see Atchison, 1999; Palys & Atchison, 2008). Within the range of topics covered, the
primary ethical issue we see is confidentiality and the impact that digital technologies have on the
security of data. In this regard, two primary areas of concern can be identified.
The first concerns the security of digital data that is gathered interactively via the Internet, for
example, through web surveys or interviews that in one way or another are computer-assisted
(e.g., by using Skype or any of the various messaging or networking programs). Once the data are
in our possession, we try to make them as invulnerable as possible by running our own data
servers, anonymising as soon as possible, encrypting everything sensitive and/or taking it offline
until needed, and never leaving any content information of any sort on our tablet laptops. Other
researchers may need to take even greater care, depending on the sensitivity of the information
they have and the potential consequences to their participants, and whatever unique legal
constraints or enhancements exist for protecting research confidentiality. Researchers in the
United States, for example, need to understand how the USA PATRIOT Act (2001) has
undermined researchers’ ability to protect confidential, sensitive information unless they are in
possession of a Confidentiality Certificate (through the National Institutes of Health) or Privacy
Certificate (through the National Institute of Justice). The Simon Fraser University research
ethics board now prohibits researchers from gathering sensitive data through any United States
company because of the threat to confidentiality the USA PATRIOT Act represents, and it is not
the only research ethics board in Canada to have done so. In Canada, no statute-based protections
of any sort are available to researchers at this time other than those at Statistics Canada (via the
Statistics Act), which means that those who do research involving sensitive information from
identifiable sources that would be of interest to a powerful third party must be doubly careful,
although such challenges occur much less frequently than in the United States (Lowman & Palys,
2001).
A second area that causes us concern, which is related to most researchers not having their own
web and data servers, concerns the new tendency toward cloud computing, in which users store
data on someone else’s server. Examples of such venues include picture-uploading sites, such as
Picassa, as well as blogs, Facebook, G-mail, and so on. Owners of these types of sites emphasize
the convenience and minimal storage requirements that this offers users who can now access their
information from any mobile device anytime, anywhere. And while such sites are potential gold
mines for their research potential, for researchers concerned about their participants’
confidentiality, this trend is fraught with danger because of the loss of control it involves;
essentially it places the researcher and his or her data at the whim of another party’s privacy and
use policies, very few of which are created with the rights and interests of researchers and
research participants in mind. Many of these sites also are in the United States, which brings us
back to the USA PATRIOT Act. Researchers doing computer-assisted research involving sensitive
information outside North America should take the time to understand the legal context in which
computing operates, and especially the extent to which the nation state in which their participants

362

International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)

reside is involved in monitoring computer traffic, as these practices and their potential
consequences to participants vary widely.
We are especially distrustful of university-based web and data servers, which are often terribly
vulnerable to hacking, and typically subject to use policies that give the university the right to
inspect any information and to manage the information in the event that a challenge to research
confidentiality arises. Although one would hope that, if such a situation arose, one’s university
would zealously engage the legal battle required to safeguard research confidences, and both the
research participants and academic freedom their existence protects, thus far, the record of
Universities doing so is less than perfect (e.g., see Lowman & Palys, 2000, 2001; Palys &
Lowman, in press; Rusk, 2012).
Beyond that, however, we find more in the way of what we consider misunderstanding about the
Internet. For example, Palys sat on a federal committee that was charged with advising the
Presidents of Canada’s major granting agencies on prospective future development of their
federal ethics policy—the Tri-Council Policy Statement on ethics in research involving human
participants—where one issue that arose was whether any specific ethical guidelines were
necessary for Internet-based research. Palys was among those who balked at the idea, in part
because he believed (a) any technological specifics the group might suggest would undoubtedly
be obsolete by the time they were published and (b) that there was no more need for special
policies on Internet-based research than there was a need for unique policies for telephone-based
research, or kitchen-based research. In every case there are threats that theoretically can be
envisioned: the telephone might be wiretapped, the kitchen might have a bug in it, but the
likelihood of this threat being realized in most cases ranges from remote to non-existent.
The Academy
Perhaps most surprising for us in terms of obstacles to pursuing the digital vision we have
outlined in our own research and with our students are the impediments that have arisen within
the academy. Three of these are noteworthy.
The first would have to be Research Ethics Boards (or REBs as they are known in Canada) and
Institutional Review Boards (or IRBs as they are known in the United States), who rarely have a
member with significant computing expertise, and, it seems, equally rarely have anyone with
qualitative research expertise (Social Sciences and Humanities Research Ethics Working
Committee, 2004). Far too often we have heard the mantra that “nothing is private” on the
Internet, without any serious consideration of what it would take for someone to intercept or steal
a piece of identifiable information about someone in the context of an actual research project. The
challenge is to avoid running away and suppressing sensitive research, while recognizing when a
realistic threat exists and engaging a specific ethical and/or legal strategy to address it (e.g., Palys
& Lowman, 2010).
A second obstacle comes from university administrations that, at least in our experience, seem
willing to devote significant portions of their budgets to quantitative software, but are unwilling
to do the same for qualitative software. At Simon Fraser University, for example, every single
computer in every single lab on campus—hundreds and hundreds of computers—has SPSS on it,
and faculty at the university are able to download the program for free as part of the university’s
lease arrangement. Meanwhile, there is not, to our knowledge, even one computer on campus that
has a university-funded qualitative data analysis program like NVivo on it, even though we have
located an extensive group of individuals across at least eight different disciplines who would be
interested in seeing the university invest in leases, so that learning qualitative data analysis
363

International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)

software could be included in our undergraduate and graduate curriculum the same way that
SPSS is. Tired of waiting for Computing Services, Palys’s department decided to invest in six
leases for its own graduate computer lab so that he can teach the program in his graduate
qualitative methods class. Another dozen people in the department decided to invest in personal
leases or outright purchases, but none of those funds came from the university administration or
computing services.
And finally, we would be remiss if we did not also mention the resistance we have found among
some members of the qualitative research community who use their computers for email and
word processing but view the prospect of digitalizing data and engaging it with qualitative
software as somehow sacrilegious. Although we understand that some persons are more
technologically interested than others, in our view the kinds of tools and techniques we have
discussed are simply part of an ever-diversifying qualitative research landscape, and an inevitable
part of its future. The current generation of graduate students needs to know enough about what
digital possibilities are available to them to make their own choices about the extent to which they
want to pursue the options the digital world opens to them, and help develop the next generation
of digital tools so that they are maximally beneficial for both researchers and participants alike.
Conclusion
We have attempted in this article to outline some of the benefits we have realized in our research
by crossing the digital divide and asking what exists and can be constructed to facilitate
qualitative and mixed methods field research. Sharing these efforts with our colleagues, both to
assist their research and to encourage them to begin incorporating some of the possibilities we
have described into their research, is the easy and enjoyable part. Trying to envision the
possibilities and stay ahead of the curve in the realm of technology-assisted social and health
research, where it seems every week brings a new development, is equally enjoyable, but also a
considerable challenge. There are, however, two rising issues that will have considerable impact
for researchers.
The first is the growing trend toward cloud computing. Although we understand its appeal for
recreational computer users, we see it as a regressive trend that is good for those who run the data
servers but bad for researchers and their participants because of the relinquishing of control it
involves. Researchers need to be responsible for the care of their data and cannot do so when they
are at the whim of their cloud service provider’s use policies. To the extent this becomes
inevitable, researchers should choose their web and data servers well, and ideally develop the
capacity to run their own.
The second, which we have only begun to consider, involves the possibilities that are opening up
because of the virtual revolution of portable computing power brought about by the iPhone,
Blackberry, Google, and their respective apps. Because we are reaching the point where virtually
everyone has a cell phone, wireless connectedness allows us to envision the possibility where
everyone in our audience can download our survey or interview questions and respond right away
by text, voice, or video. Voice recognition has the potential to make keyboards obsolete and open
up data gathering possibilities even further. Beyond that, time will tell.

364

International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)

References
Atchison, C. (1999). Navigating the virtual minefield: Using the Internet as a medium for
conducting primary social research. In D. Currie, D. Hay, & B. MacLean (Eds.),
Exploring the social world: Social research in action (pp. 145-158). Vancouver, BC:
Collective Press.
Atchison, C. (2000). Emerging styles of social control on the Internet: Justice denied. Critical
Criminology: An International Journal, 9(1-2), 85-100.
Atchison, C., Lowman, J., & Fraser, L. (1998). Men who buy sex: Preliminary findings of an
exploratory study. In J. E. Elias, V. L. Bullough, V. Elias, & G. Brewer (Eds.),
Prostitution: On whores, hustlers, and johns (pp. 172-203). Amherst, NY: Prometheus
Books.
Atchison, C., & Thomas, J. (2000). The internet and the state: Instrument of control or subversive
technology? Critical Criminology: An International Journal, 9(1-2), 163-170.
Auld, G., Diker, A., Bock, M., Boushey, C., Bruhn, C., Cluskey, C., . . . Zaghloul, S. (2007).
Development of a decision tree to determine appropriateness of NVivo in analyzing
qualitative data sets. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 39(1), 37-47.
Bainbridge, W. (1999). Cyberspace: Sociology’s natural domain. Contemporary Sociology, 28(6),
664-668.
Bauman, S., Airey, J., & Atak, H. (1998, May). Effective use of web-based technology: Using the
Internet for data collection and communication applications. Paper presented at the 53rd
Conference of the American Association for Public Opinion Research, St. Louis, MO.
Boyd, D., & Ellison, N. (2008). Social network sites: Definition, history, and scholarship.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1), 210–230.
Couper, M., Traugott, M., & Lamias, M. (2001). Web survey design and administration. Public
Opinion Quarterly, 65(2), 230-55.
Crowley, C., Harre, R., & Tagg, C. (2002). Qualitative research and computing: Methodological
issues and practices in using QSR NVivo and NUD*IST. International Journal of Social
Research Methodology, 5(3), 193- 197.
De Bruyn, A., & Lilien, G. (2004). A multi-stage model of word of mouth through electronic
referrals. eBusiness Research Center Working Paper. Retrieved from
http://www.smeal.psu.edu/cdt/ebrcpubs/res_papers/2004_02.pdf
Durian, D. (2002). Corpus-based text analysis from a qualitative perspective: A closer look at
NVivo. Style, 36(4), 738-742.
Kolar, K., & Atchison, C. (2012). Recruitment of sex buyers: A comparison of the efficacy of
conventional and computer network-based approaches. Social Science Computing
Review. Advance online publication. doi:10.1177/0894439312453001.

365

International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)

Lewis, R. B. (2004). NVivo 2.0 and ATLAS.ti 5.0: A comparative review of two popular
qualitative data-analysis programs. Field Methods, 16(4), 439-469.
Lofland, J., Snow, D., Anderson, L., & Lofland, L. H. (2006). Analyzing social settings: A guide
to qualitative observation and analysis (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Lowman, J., & Palys, T. S. (2000). Ethics and institutional conflict of interest: The research
confidentiality controversy at Simon Fraser University. Sociological Practice: A Journal
of Clinical and Applied Sociology, 2(4), 245-55.
Lowman, J., & Palys, T. S. (2001). The ethics and law of confidentiality in criminal justice
research: A comparison of Canada and the United States. International Criminal Justice
Review, 11(1), 1-33.
McLuhan, M. (1962). The Gutenberg galaxy: The making of typographic man. Toronto, ON:
University of Toronto Press.
McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding media: The extensions of man. New York, NY: McGraw
Hill.
Palys, T. S., & Atchison, C. (2008). Research decisions: Quantitative and qualitative
perspectives (4th ed.). Toronto, ON: Thompson-Nelson Canada.
Palys, T., & Lowman, J. (2010). Going boldly where no one has gone before? How
confidentiality risk aversion is killing research on sensitive topics. Journal of Academic
Ethics, 8(4), 265-284.
Palys, T. S., & Lowman, J. (in press). Defending research confidentiality “to the extent the law
allows”: Lessons from the Boston College subpoenas. Journal of Academic Ethics.
Rusk, D. (2012, January 2). Researcher hits out at Boston College in IRA interviews row. Irish
News. Retrieved from
http://bostoncollegesubpoena.wordpress.com/2012/01/02/researcher-hits-out-at-bostoncollege-in-ira-interviews-row/
Smyth, R. (2006). Exploring congruence between Habermasian philosophy, mixed-method
research, and managing data using NVivo. International Journal of Qualitative Methods,
5(2), 1-11.
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Ethics Special Working Committee. (2004). Giving
voice to the spectrum: Report of the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Ethics
Special Working Committee. Retrieved from http://pre.ethics.gc.ca/eng/archives/policypolitique/reports-rapports/reports-rapports/
Tapscott, D. (2008). Grown up digital: How the net generation is changing your world. New
York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and
Obstruct Terrorism (USA PATRIOT Act) Act of 2001, Pub. L. No. 107 –56. 115 Stat.
272 (2001). Retrieved from
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-107publ56/pdf/PLAW-107publ56.pdf
366

International Journal of Qualitative Methods 2012, 11(4)

Whyte, W. F. (1943). Street corner society: The social structure of an Italian slum. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Zimmer, M. (2010). But the data is already public: On the ethics of research in Facebook. Ethics
and Information Technology, 12(4), 313-325.

367

