International Journal of Business and Management; Vol. 9, No. 11; 2014
ISSN 1833-3850 E-ISSN 1833-8119
Published by Canadian Center of Science and Education

Qualitative Research Method: Grounded Theory
Shahid N Khan1
1

Department of Management, Monash University, Australia

Correspondence: Shahid N Khan, Department of Management, Monash University, Australia. E-mail:
shahid.khan@monash.edu
Received: August 21, 2014

Accepted: October 8, 2014

Online Published: October 22, 2014

doi:10.5539/ijbm.v9n11p224

URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.5539/ijbm.v9n11p224

Abstract
In this literature review paper, the researcher has done some efforts to identify and further to elaborate the basic
components of a research methods chapter that are integral part of any research paper while conducting
grounded theory approach. Grounded theory is one of the data collection approach in qualitative research
methods which is totally based on data rather than try to emerge theory from data. There are bulk of books and
research papers written by world renowned researchers and authors but the aim of this paper is to help the early
stage researchers in conducting their projects in grounded theory approach. In this paper, the researcher has shed
light on history of grounded theory, how this theory rather approach works, target population, sampling
technique, data collection methods and the role of a researcher in this whole research process, and another
essential part of a qualitative research, ethics which play a crucial role while conducting and gathering a
qualitative data, have also been discussed in this paper.
Keywords: grounded theory, inductive reasoning, theory building, theoretical sampling, ethics
1. Introduction
Studies that incorporate grounded theory approach are basically a step towards conceptual thinking and theory
building rather than empirical testing of the theory. Hence, a qualitative research approach is used in these types
of studies. Particularly it is conceptual thinking and theory building that’s why the researchers usually are going
to conduct an inductive, constructivist ‘Grounded Theory’ approach. As it is the systematic development of
theory in social settings and it depends upon inductive approaches which is appropriate for the study mainly aim
on theory development (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). Furthermore, the research questions and literature review by
it-self leads and support for conceptual thinking and theory building rather than empirical testing of the theory
and this type of study follows an inductive theory building approach. Gray (2009) argued that deductive
reasoning moves towards hypothesis testing to verify, refuse or modify a theory based on empirical data,
whereas inductive reasoning seeks to discover a binding principle and to construct generalizations, relationships
and even theories by analysing the data collected for this purpose. However, he also emphasized that the
inductive process may still have some pre-existing theories or ideas when approaching a problem. Nonetheless, it
does not pursue to approve or negate the existing theories, but endeavours to create outlines, stabilities and
significances by collecting data (Gray, 2009).
1.1 The Research Philosophy of the Study
Conceptual thinking and theory building is interrelated with the qualitative research method approach –
grounded theory (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). Qualitative research is used to explore the potential antecedents and
factors about which little has been known and explored (Strauss & Corbin, 1998). This has further been
elaborated by Guba and Lincoln (1983) that it is a naturalistic paradigm and assume that the reality is manifold
and inter-related and it links the researcher with the subject. Qualitative research is based on three paradigms and
main paradigms within the qualitative research are positivist, interpretivist, and critical paradigms (Punch, 1998).
Neuman, defined paradigm as…
‘A paradigm is a framework or a set of assumptions that explain how the world is perceived where ‘the paradigm
of a science includes its basic assumptions, the important questions to be answered or puzzles to be solved, the
research techniques to be used, and examples of what scientific research looks like’(Neuman, 1991, p. 57).
Kuhn (1970) is famous as a first researcher for using paradigms in the context of a framework to understand
inquiry. He sees paradigms as…
224

www.ccsenet.org/ijbm

International Journal of Business and Management

Vol. 9, No. 11; 2014

‘A set of values and techniques which is shared by members of a scientific community, which act as a guide or
map, dictating the kinds of problems scientists should address and the types of explanations that are acceptable
to them’(Kuhn, 1970, p. 175).
These paradigms are further based on three perspectives. These perspectives are epistemology, ontology and
methodology (Denzin & Lincoln, 2003; Punch, 2013). The epistemological perspective is concerned with the
way knowledge is acquired. It totally depends upon the relationship between researcher and how the researchers
perceive that reality (Creswell, 2007; Gratton & Jones, 2004; Punch, 1998). Ontology is concerned with the
nature of reality. The reality is perceived as subjective and depends how researchers and participants perceive it
(Creswell, 2007; Punch, 1998). Methodology is concerned with process and method through which the
researcher acquires knowledge about the world (Creswell, 2007; Edwards & Skinners, 2009; Punch, 1998,
2013).
Neuman (1991) differentiated the interpretivism and positivism philosophical paradigms. He said that the
positivist view of the world is objective where behaviour and cause and effect can be measured and human
activity can be predicted. In this regard, he added that…
‘For a positivist researcher, the purpose of research is to understand, ‘how the world works so that the events can
be controlled or predicted’(Neuman, 1991, p. 58).
An interpretivist view of the world is subjective, where individuals form their own reality of the world in
different contexts through interactions with others. Every individual perceives the world differently and views it
in different contexts. Therefore, their actions and behaviours are unpredictable. Both philosophical paradigms
have their own strengths and weaknesses as described by Cavana, Delahaye, and Sekaran (2001) that positivism
is considered superficial while, interpretivism is considered too subjective. Irrespective of the fact, that both
approaches have their own strengths, the most important thing in considering methods for inquiry is based upon
the research requirements and research objectives (Cassell& Johnson, 2006; Cavana et al., 2001).
Ultimately, this type of research which’s aim is conceptual thinking and theory building, is based upon an
interpretivist approach as the researcher wants to see the social world from the participant’s perspective and
consider the participant’s perception of the world (Edwards & Skinners, 2009). This is further explained by
Denzin and Lincoln (2003, p. 296) that an interpretivist approach depends upon both, the participant’s view and
the researcher’s view of reality, so that the researcher can…
‘Find meaning in an action, or to say one understands what a particular action means, requiring that one
interprets in a particular way what the actions are doing’.
1.2 Research Design
1.2.1 Qualitative Research Design
‘We can never achieve a complete ‘scientific’ understanding of the human world. The best we can do is to arrive
at a truth that makes a difference that opens up new possibilities for understanding’ (McLeod, 2001, p. 4).
The methodological framework is qualitative approach and further in qualitative research, this type of study is
focused on ‘grounded theory approach’ as it is conceptual thinking and theory building rather than theory or
hypothesis testing (Glaser & Strauss, 1967), which is usually done in quantitative research approach. Qualitative
research is an interpretive and naturalistic approach (Guba& Lincoln, 1994). According to (Creswell, 1998, p.
15)…
‘Qualitative research is an inquiry process of understanding based on distinct methodological traditions on
inquiry that explore a social or human problem. The researcher builds a complex, holistic picture, analyses words,
reports details of informants, and conducts the study in a natural setting’.
Qualitative research is based upon the observations and interpretations of people’s perception of different events
and it takes the snapshot of the people’s perception in a natural setting (Guba, 1990; Guba& Lincoln, 1994;
Newman, 1994). In a ‘grounded theory’ approach in which the researchers try to highlight and explore
employee’s perception regarding some phenomenon e.g. abusive supervision (Khan, Qureshi, & Ahmad, 2010;
Tepper, 2000) in an organization, qualitative data gathered through face-to-face, focus group, telephonic etc.
interviews. Further, to refine the construct and to answer the research questions, the researchers have to get data
and analyse it and then again and again repeat this process until and unless new data stop emerging or the data
saturation occurred (Glaser & Strauss, 1967) and the grounded theory approach is an appropriate way to study
human behaviour on a sensitive topic even in a different cultural context (Wolcott, 1980). In table 1.1, the
researcher tried to different the grounded theory approach from the rest of the qualitative approaches.

225

www.ccsenet.org/ijbm

International Journal of Business and Management

Vol. 9, No. 11; 2014

Table 1. Contrasting characteristics of five qualitative approaches
Characteristics

Narrative
Research

Phenomenology

Focus

Exploring the life of
an individual

Understanding
essence
of
experience

Type

of

problem

best
suited
design

for

Discipline
background

Needing

to

Data
strategies

Describing

and

grounded in
from the field

interpreting

a

culture-sharing
group

Developing

and analysis of a
case or
cases

multiple
an

Grounding a theory

Describing

and

Providing

in the views
participants

interpreting

the

in-depth

Drawing from the

Drawing

humanities

philosophy,

Drawing
sociology

including

psychology,
education

and

Studying

several

from

shared patterns of
culture of a group

understanding of a
case or cases

Drawing

from

Drawing

anthropology
sociology

and

psychology,

from

political
medicine

law,
science,

history,
and

Studying one or
more individuals

Using

from

of

an

in-depth description

the essence of a
lived phenomenon

primarily

interviews
documents

analysis

Developing a theory

the

Needing to describe

psychology,
sociology

collection

the

data

Case Study

tell

literature,

Data
forms

Ethnography

stories of individual
experiences

anthropology,

Unit of analysis

Grounded Theory

and

Studying a process,

Studying a group

Studying an event, a

individuals that have

action,

program,

shared
experience

interaction

that shares the same
culture

Using

Using

the

involving
individuals
primarily

interviews

with

individuals, although

Using

or
many

primarily

interviews with 20 –
60 individuals

primarily

Using

multiple

observations

and

sources,

such

interviews,

but

interviews,

documents,

perhaps

observations, and art

other sources during

may
also
considered

extended
field

be

an

activity, more than
one individual

collecting
time

as

observations,
documents, artifacts

in

Analysing data for

Analysing data for

Analysing

data

Analysing

stories, “restoring”

significant

through

open

through description

through description

stories, developing

statements, meaning

coding,

axial

of

of

themes, often using
a chronology

units, textural and

coding,
coding

selective

structural

data

culture-sharing

Analysing
the

data
case

and

group; themes about
groups

themes of the case

description,

as well as cross-case
themes

description of the
“essence”
Witten report

Developing

a

narrative about the
stories
of
an
individual’s life

Describing

the

Generating a theory

Describing how a

Developing

“essence” of
experience

the

illustrated
figure

culture-sharing
group works

detailed analysis of
one or more cases

in

a

a

Source: Modified by Creswell (2007; P. 78-79).

2. Grounded Theory
The qualitative research approach ‘grounded theory’ has been developed by two sociologists, Barney Glaser &
Anselm Strauss (Glaser, 1978, 1992; Glaser & Strauss, 1967, 2009; Strauss, 1987). They defined ‘grounded
theory’ in these words as ‘The theory that was derived from data, systematically gathered and analysed through
the research process’ (Strauss & Corbin, 1990, p. 12).Grounded theory is all about data collection and analysis.
In this approach the aim is to construct a theory that is grounded in the data (Glaser, 1978, 1992; Glaser &

226

www.ccsenet.org/ijbm

International Journal of Business and Management

Vol. 9, No. 11; 2014

Strauss, 1967, 2009; Strauss, 1987). According to Glaser (1992) grounded theory deals with only inductive
approach rather than deductive approach of inquiry. Further, (Punch, 1998, p. 163) defined the grounded theory
approach very briefly in these words as…
‘Grounded theory is not a theory at all. It is a method, an approach, a strategy. In my opinion, grounded theory is
best defined as a research strategy whose purpose is to generate theory from data. ‘Grounded’ means that the
theory will be generated on the basis of data; the theory will therefore be grounded in data. ‘Theory’ means that
the objective of collecting and analysing the research data is to generate theory. The essential in grounded theory
is that theory will be developed inductively from data’.
While Charmaz (2014) added that grounded theory is focused on inductive strategies for dataanalysis. It starts
with abstract concepts and to explain and understand data. The journey of theory development in grounded
theory approach starts and ends with the data. This journey is best explained by the (Strauss & Corbin, 1998, p.
12) as…
‘Data collection, analysis, and eventual theory stand in close relationship to one another…the researcher begins
with an area of study and allows the theory to emerge from the data…grounded theories, because they are drawn
from data, are likely to offer insight, enhance understanding, and provide a meaningful guide to action’.
2.1 Evolution of Grounded Theory
Since the grounded theory development in 1967 by Glaser & Strauss, it’s in the process of amendments by its
instigators and others academic researchers for the last four decades. This theory is further split into two
‘versions’ by its originators and that is called the Glaser’s version (Glaser, 1978, 1992) and that of (Strauss, 1987;
Strauss & Corbin, 1990, 1998) version. Glaser kept on focusing on the earlier concept and remained consistent
with it, the one he discovered with the Strauss.They defined grounded theory as ‘…a method of discovery,
treated categories as emergent from the data, relied on direct and, often, narrow empiricism, and analysed a basic
social process’. While, Strauss (1987) moved the method towards verification, rather than focused on the earlier
version of grounded theory. Despite a lot of criticism, (Strauss, 1987; Strauss & Corbin, 1990, 1998) version of
grounded theory is more famous than the earlier version of grounded theory. Their book serves as a powerful
tool for conducting grounded theory approach and has instructed graduates students all over the world (Charmaz,
2014).He, Charmaz (2006, pp. 5-6)further mentioned in his book rather cited the (Glaser, 1978; Glaser & Strauss,
1967; Strauss, 1987) defining components of grounded theory practice in these words as…
‘Simultaneous involvement in data collection and analysis.Constructing analytic codes and categories from data,
not from preconceived logically deduced hypotheses.Using the constant comparative method, which involves
making comparisons during each stage of the analysis.Advancing theory development during each step of data
collection and analysis.Memo-writing to elaborate categories, specify their properties, define relationships
between categories, and identify gaps. Sampling aimed toward theory construction, not for population
representativeness. Conducting the literature review after developing an independent analysis’.
He, Charmaz (2003, p. 250) further summarized the grounded theory history, since its inception in 1967, in the
appended below words…
‘What grounded theory is and should be is contested. Glaser and Strauss and Corbin have moved the method in
somewhat conflicting directions (Glaser, 1992; Strauss, 1987; Strauss & Corbin, 1990, 1994, 1998). Glaser’s
(1978, 1992) position often comes close to traditional positivism, with its assumptions of an objective, external
reality, a neutral observer who discovers data, reductionist inquiry of manageable research problems, and
objectivist rendering of data. Strauss and Corbin’s (1990, 1998) stance assumes an objective external reality,
aims towards unbiased data collection, proposes a set of technical procedures, and espouses verification. Their
position moves to post-positivism because they also propose giving voice to their respondents, representing them
as accurately as possible, discovering acknowledging how respondents’ views of reality conflict with their own,
and recognizing art as well as science in the analytic product and process’.
2.2 Constructivist Grounded Theory
The Strauss (1987) and Strauss and Corbin (1998) work turned the direction of grounded theory from positivist
paradigm towards a more constructivist paradigm. This is best illustrated in the mentioned below paragraph by
(Annells, 1996, p. 279)…
‘A theory is not the formulation of some discovered aspect of a pre-existing reality ‘out there’. To think
otherwise is to take a positivist position…theories are interpretations made from given perspectives as adopted or
researched by researchers. To say that a given theory is an interpretation – and therefore fallible – is not at all to
deny that judgments can be made about the soundness or probably usefulness of it’
227

www.ccsenet.org/ijbm

International Journal of Business and Management

Vol. 9, No. 11; 2014

While, Charmaz (2003, pp. 272-273) defined it in more detail and tried to differentiate between the true and real
in grounded theory perspective…
‘A constructivist grounded theory distinguishes between the real and the true. The constructivist approach does
not seek truth – single, universal, and lasting. Still, it remains realist because it addresses human realities and
assumes the existence of real worlds…the constructivist approach assumes what we take as real, as objective
knowledge and truth, is based upon our perspective…thus the grounded theorist constructs an image of reality,
not the reality – that is, objective, true, and external’.
3. Theoretical Sampling
Theoretical sampling is an integral part of the grounded theory approach as it lead the researcher what to collect
next. In this regard, the important definition of the theoretical sampling presented by Glaser and Strauss (1967, p.
45) that what theoretical sampling is and what is its role in grounded theory approach. According to them,
theoretical sampling is…
‘The process of data collection for generating theory whereby the analyst jointly collects, codes, and analyses his
data and decides what data to collect next and where to find them, in order to develop his theory as it emerges’.
Similar definition of theoretical sampling has been reported by Strauss and Corbin (1998, p. 202) in these words,
as…
‘[Theoretical Sampling] rather than being predetermined before beginning the research, evolves during the
process. It is based on concepts that emerged from analysis and that appear to have relevance to the evolving
theory…the aim of theoretical sampling is to maximise opportunities to compare events, incidents, or
happenings to determine how a category varies in terms of its properties and dimensions’.
The adequate theoretical sampling is important for development of diverse and wide range of theory while,
inadequate theoretical sampling can lead the theory development process towards weak, thin and not well
integrated base of theory (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). The importance of theoretical sampling is further elaborated
by (Charmaz, 2003, 2006) that theoretical sampling plays an important role in getting pertinent data that is
important in the process of emergence of theory. It plays an important role in refining theory development
process and the theory by itself by leading the researcher towards relevant data and this data collection process
continues until and unless new data stop emerging. He further differentiated the initial sampling from the
theoretical sampling as the researchers usually mixed it up. In this regard, he added that…
‘Initial sampling in grounded theory is where you start, whereas theoretical sampling directs you where to go’
(Charmaz, 2006, p. 100).
To further explain it, Charmaz (2006, p. 101) cited in his book an interview with Jane Hood, understanding
theoretical sampling. Jane Hood commented that…
‘Very few people do [understand it]. I really think it’s a craft … you need somebody to give you feed-back as
you’re trying to learn how to do this because there is a subtle difference between theoretical sampling and other
kinds of purposeful sampling. Theoretical sampling is purposeful sampling but its purposeful sampling
according to categories that one develops from one’s analysis and these categories are not based upon quotas;
they’re based on theoretical concerns. And – the authors of text-books don’t get it. The authors of textbooks
typically say [something like], ‘Oh, you don’t have enough women; go get more.’ No, that’s not theoretical
sampling. That’s basically quota sampling or sampling on demographic characteristics. There’s nothing wrong
with starting out that way but that’s your first step. Theoretical sampling really makes grounded theory special
and is the major strength of grounded theory because theoretical sampling allows you to tighten what I call the
corkscrew or the hermeneutic spiral so that you end up with a theory that perfectly matches your data. Because
you choose the next people to talk to or the next cases to find based upon the [theoretical] analysis and you don’t
waste your time with all sorts of things that have nothing to do with your developing theory’.
4. Unit of Analysis
The most important part of any research is the unit of analysis as the whole research based upon the unit of
analysis. According to the Neuman (2011, p. 69) the unit of analysis is…
‘The units, cases, or parts of social life that are under consideration. They are key to developing concepts,
empirically measuring or observing concepts, and using data analyses. It ‘refers to the level of aggregation of the
data collected during the subsequent data analysis stage’.
The unit of analysis could be individuals, dyads, groups, and organizations. The determination of the unit of
analysis during the initial stage of research is crucial as the conceptual framework; data collection techniques
228

www.ccsenet.org/ijbm

International Journal of Business and Management

Vol. 9, No. 11; 2014

and sample size are each depends upon the unit of analysis (Cavana et al., 2001). Further Neuman (2011)
highlighted the units of analyses that it includes individuals, peoples, groups, organizations, movements,
institutions, countries and so forth. He explained it through an example that the concept of aggression can be
applied to several units: an individual, group, organization, or country.
4.1 Qualitative Data Collection Methods
It is very important to explore the research for conceptual development, clarification of constructs and further its
operationalization. Through the academic literature, the identification of the constructs and further its
nomological network to these constructs to the development of the conceptual framework is an important step
before selecting a qualitative data collection method. Exploratory research is usually conducted for exploring the
constructs and fields when limited information and research is available on the subject area (Cavana et al., 2001).
Qualitative research is the best method for exploring research (Creswell, 2007). He, Creswell (2007) has
identified four techniques of qualitative data collection which researchers can adopt. These are field work,
observation, interviews (including group interviews and focus groups), and document analysis.
Therefore, for qualitative research data collection especially in a grounded theory approach, the form of
semi-structured in-depth interviews and focus groups can be used to get data. Here the aim of data collection and
analysis is to identify and explore the antecedents and factors associated with the phenomenon of the study
according to the employees’ perception. The interview data will be transcribed and analysed through coding and
constant comparison process, keeping in view the constructivist grounded theory approach. Analysed data of
interviews along with the literature will be used to integrate and for the development of conceptual thinking and
theory building.
4.1.1 Selection of Participants
Basically, Sampling is a method of deducing information about whole population instead of going to measure
every unit of the population. Only appropriate and proper development of the sampling technique will lead to the
authenticity of the results. The importance of sampling in any type of research is highlighted by Punch (1998, p.
193)as…
‘We cannot study everyone, everywhere doing everything. Sampling decisions are required not only about which
people to interview or which events to observe, but also about settings and processes.’
He further added that the sampling plan and sampling parameters are interrelated with the purpose of the study
and research questions of the study. He further stressed upon this point that the research questions and purposes
should be align with the sample, if not then it needs further development. While, Neuman (2011, p. 240) stressed
on the element of representation that sample is ‘a small set of cases a researcher selects from a large pool and
generalizes to the population’. He, Neuman (2011, p. 67) further cited in his book (Howard Becker, Tricks of the
Trade) as…
‘Sampling is a major problem for any type of research. We cannot study every case of whatever we are
interested in, nor should we want to. Every scientific enterprise tries to find out something that will apply to
everything of a certain kind by studying a few examples, the result of the study being, as we say, ‘generalizable’.
He distinguished it from the population in these words that ‘The abstract idea of a large group of many cases
from which a researcher draws a sample and to which results from a sample are generalized’ (Neuman, 2011, p.
241).
Now the question is that what should be the size of sample, it depends upon the type of research we are going to
conduct wether its quantitative or qualitative research. The researchers have defined different criteria for
quantitative and qualitative research but the common thing is that it depends upon the population characteristics,
types of data and its accuracy likes its degree of confidence. It’s not the matter of small or large but the
representativeness (Neuman, 2011). Regarding the qualitative research sampling he cited in his book (Flick,
1998, p. 41) that ‘It is their relevance to the research topic rather than their representativeness which determines
the way in which the people to be studied are selected’.
Ideally, sample represents the whole population on the characteristics of interest (Burns & Grove, 2009).
4.1.2 Interviews
The type of interviews range from structured, semi-structured, open-ended, face-to-face, telephonic, one-on-one,
computer-assisted interviews, group interviews, and focus group interviews etc. interview ‘provides a unique
opportunity to uncover rich and complex information from an individual’ (Cavana et al., 2001, p. 138). It is very
important for data gathering through interviews (Willis, 2007, p. 17) that…

229

www.ccsenet.org/ijbm

International Journal of Business and Management

Vol. 9, No. 11; 2014

‘The world view within which you are conducting research plays a defining role in how you prepared for the
interview, who you choose an interviewee, what questions you ask, how you structure the interview, and how
you interpret the data’.
He further cited (Fontana & James, 1994, p. 364) who mentioned the most important points as a guideline to
conduct structured interviews. These are very important points which describe what interpretivist research are
not. In these guidelines, simply delete the ‘never and don’ts’ and you would get the essence of interviewing in
the interpretivist world. These are:
Never get involved in long explanations of the study; use the standard explanation provided by the supervisor.
Never deviate from the study introduction, sequence of questions, or question wording.
Never let another person interrupts the interview; do not let another person answer for the respondent or offer his
or her opinions on the question.
Never suggest an answer or agree or disagree with an answer. Do not give the respondent any idea of your
personal views on the topic of the question or survey.
Never interpret the meaning of a question; just repeat the question and give instructions or clarifications that are
provided in training or by supervisors.
Never improvise, such as by adding answer categories, or make wording changes.
4.2 Characteristics of Qualitative Research
According to Burns and Grove (2009), qualitative research is a systematic and subjective approach to highlight
and explain daily life experiences and to further give them proper meaning. Further, Holloway and Wheeler
(2002) briefly discussed the qualitative research in these words that it allows the researchers to deeply explore
behaviours, different perspectives, and life experiences. And further to find out the complexities of the situation
through a holistic framework. According to Creswell (2007) qualitative research got a distinct method to explore
a social or human problem or phenomenon. It conducts studies in natural setting.
4.3 Role of the Researcher
The researcher plays a role of ‘lens’ through which data are gathered and interpreted. In this process the
researcher play a very neutral role as to avoid the biasness in data collection and further its interpretation so as,
to present the unbiased result of the study. As, Glaser (1999, p. 838) briefly discussed the grounded theory
researcher in these words…
‘The grounded theory researcher has three important characteristics: An ability to conceptualize data, an ability
to tolerate some confusion, and an ability to tolerate confusion’s attendance regression. These attributes are
necessary because they enable the researcher to wait for the conceptual sense making to emerge from the data.
This is just a fact…students who attempt grounded theory but cannot tolerate confusion and regression, and who
need to continually feel cognitively in control, fall by the wayside. They get fed up’.
4.4 Data Collection Procedures
For data collection the employees can be approached after or during office hours and should be given
information regarding the nature and rationale of the research. The respondents should be guaranteed of the
privacy and secrecy of the data and results. As, earlier mentioned that the researchers while conducting a
‘grounded theory’ approach and for the first round, they can distribute structured questionnaires to have
employee’s perception of the phenomenon of interest in an organization. If it exists in the organization then the
researcher can conduct face-to-face, in-depth, open ended and semi-structured interviews and focus groups
interviews. In these types of interviews, the researcher has better chance to get their opinions, views and
experiences in detail. The pattern of semi-structured interviews allow and enable the researcher to have prepared
a topic guide or relevant questions to be covered with each participant in one setting (Polit & Beck, 2008).
Further the face-to-face interview allows the researcher to deeply observe the participant for any non-verbal
communication but also allows both the interviewer and the interviewee (participant) to clarify the ambiguities
and necessary points. The researchers did not mention any specific time duration for interviews but can be last
for 60 to 90 minutes however, these questions and times are merely a guide and estimation for the interview
sessions; the interview time and duration depends upon the participant’s responses which can extend and prolong
the interviews sessions.
The interviews can be audio-taped with permission from the participant to ascertain an accurate account of the
interview which can be replayed for analytic purposes and anonymity should be assured during the course of the

230

www.ccsenet.org/ijbm

International Journal of Business and Management

Vol. 9, No. 11; 2014

recording. Participants should be reminded of their right to withdraw from the study or terminate the interview at
any time before commencing the session.
4.5 Ethical Issues
‘Ethics begins and ends with you, the researcher’ (Neuman, 2011, p. 143).Ethical issues are important for both
quantitative and qualitative research, but ethical considerations are more important in qualitative research as
qualitative research approaches often intrudes in participant’s lives (Punch, 1998). That’s why Neuman (2011, p.
143) made the individual researcher responsible for research ethics. He added that ‘It is the moral and
professional obligation of the individual researcher to be ethical even when research participants are unaware of
or unconcerned about ethics’.
In the whole research process, the researcher is the one who knows the potential benefits and losses involved in
an on-going research project. While collecting any kind of information or data from participants, the researcher
should disclose all benefits and losses that may affect the participants (Punch, 1998). Some general ethical issues
in research that result in some prohibitions are: never cause unnecessary or irreversible harm to participants,
secure prior voluntary consent when possible and never unnecessarily humiliate, degrade, or release harmful
information about specific individuals that was collected for research purposes. These are minimal standards and
are subject to interpretation (e.g., what does ‘unnecessary’ mean in a specific situation?). Participation in any
kind of research must be voluntary, and the researcher must inform participants regarding all aspects of research
studies. In this regard, this is pertinent to note that the researcher has got an informed consent statement signed
by the participants, inform them of their rights and provide brief information about the research study (Neuman,
2011).
To avoid the organisation’s involvement in data collection, from the ethics approval perspective, the researcher
can avoid recruiting participants through their organisations. Rather, individuals can be contacted, using a
snow-ball sampling technique, through the researcher’s personal contacts and social networks. To get the full
essence of the study, the researcher should get the participant’s confidence, consent and approval before
proceeding in an interview with the participant. Before approaching participants for data collection through
interviews, prior informed consent should be obtained from them and they should be informed that they can
withdraw anytime during the interview. To avoid any kind of identification of individuals, supervisors or
organisations, the research can be based on employees’ past experiences and perceptions of the phenomenon.
Participants should be motivated to share their experiences of the phenomenon but not the specific individual
supervisors or organisations. If advertently or inadvertently the participants identify any individual supervisors
or organisation, the researcher should immediately remind them that the researcher do not wish them to disclose
such information. And while transcribing the audio recordings any individual supervisors and organisation
identification should be replaced with pseudonyms or omitted altogether. And at the end of the interview, the
researcher should assure the interviewee of the confidentiality of interview data. Given the potentially sensitive
nature of the topic for employees and the fact that the researcher would be discussing issues that may raise some
painful memories for the participants, the researcher should identify support or other information services in
advance that individuals can access in their area should they feel the need to after conversation, and should
provide these details to each participant.
After data collection, all the data in any form, e.g., printed transcripts or audio recordings, should be kept in a
locked filing cabinet in the researcher’s office and any electronic data (NVivo) files should be stored in
password-protected computers.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, the researcher has highlighted the qualitative research methods approach – grounded theory which
is not a theory by itself but play an important role in developing and building a theory from data. Its history and
evolution and the two schools of thoughts e.g. Glaser’s version and Strauss and Corbin’s Version have also been
discussed. Further the author stressed and emphasised on the later version as it is getting more popularity and is
more inclined towards constructivist approach rather than positivist approach. There are some other integral parts
of the qualitative research methods while conducting grounded theory approach, have also been included and
elaborated in this paper e.g. theoretical sampling, unit of analysis, sampling, target population, role of the
researcher, data collection procedures and techniques and ethics etc.
References
Annells, M. (1996). Grounded theory method: Philosophical perspectives, paradigm of inquiry, and
postmodernism.
Qualitative
Health
Research,
6(3),
379–393.

231

www.ccsenet.org/ijbm

International Journal of Business and Management

Vol. 9, No. 11; 2014

http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/104973239600600306
Burns, N., & Grove, S. K. (2009). The Practice of Nursing Research: Appraisal, Synthesis, and Generation of
Evidence.
Cassell, C., & Johnson, P. (2006). Action research: explaining the diversity. Human Relations, 59(6), 783–814.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0018726706067080
Cavana, R. Y., Delahaye, B. L., & Sekaran, U. (2001).Applied Business Research: Qualitative and Quantitative
Methods (1st ed.). US & Australia: John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd
Charmaz, K. (2003). Grounded theory: Obejectivist and constructivist methods. In N. K. D. Y. S. Lincoln (Ed.),
Strategies of qualitative inquiry (2nd ed., pp. 249–291). London: Sage.
Charmaz, K. (2006). Construting Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide through Qualitative Analysis. Thousand
Oaks: Sage.
Charmaz, K. (2014). Constructing grounded theory. Sage.
Creswell, J. W. (1998). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five traditions. London: Sage.
Creswell, J. W. (2007). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five traditions (2nd ed.).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Denzin, K. N., & Lincoln, S. Y. (2003). Introduction: The Discipline and Practice of Qualitative Research. In N.
K. Denzin, Yvonna S. Lincoln, (Eds.), Qualitative Research (3rd ed., pp. 1–32). Thousands Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Edwards, A., & Skinners, J. (2009). Research Paradigms in Qualitative Sports Research Management.In A. E. J.
Skinners (Ed.), Qualitative Reseaerch in Sports Management (1st ed., p. 439). UK & USA: Elesiver Ltd.
Flick, U. (1998). An Introduction to Qualitative Research (1st ed.). London: SAGE Publications.
Fontana, A., & James, F. (1994). The Art of Science. In N. a. Y. L. Denzin (Ed.), Handbook of qualitative
research (pp. 361–376). Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications.
Glaser, B. G. (1978). Theoretical sensitivity: Advances in the methodology of grounded theory (Vol. 2).
Sociology Press Mill Valley, CA.
Glaser, B. G. (1992). Emergence vs forcing: Basics of grounded theory analysis.Sociology Press.
Glaser, B. G. (1999). The future of grounded theory.Qualitative Health Research, 9(6), 836–845.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/104973299129122199
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery grounded theory: strategies for qualitative inquiry.Aldin,
Chicago.
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. (2009). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research.
Transaction Publishers.
Gratton, C., & Jones, I. (2004). Analyzing data II: Qualitative data analysis. Research methods for sport studies,
217–227.
Gray, D. E. (2009).Doing Research in the Real World (2nd ed.). SAGE Publications.
Guba, E. G. (1990). The paradigm dialog.Sage Publications.
Guba, E. G., & Lincoln, Y. S. (1983). Effective evaluation. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Guba, E. G., & Lincoln, Y. S. (1994). Competing paradigms in qualitative research. In N. K. D. Y. S. Lincoln
(Ed.), Handbook of qualitative research (pp. 105–117). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Holloway, I., & Wheeler, S. (2002). Qualitative Research in Nursing (p. 296).
Khan, S. N., Qureshi, I. M., & Ahmad, H. I. (2010). Abusive Supervision and Negative Employee Outcomes.
European Journal of Social Sciences, 15(4), 490–500.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The Structure of scientific revolutions (2nd ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
McLeod, J. (2001). Qualitative Research in Counselling and Psychotherapy. SAGE.
Neuman, W. L. (1991). Social research methods: qualitative and quantitative approaches. Boston:Allyn and
Bacon.
Neuman, W. L. (2011). Social Research Methods: Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches. USA: Allyn and

232

www.ccsenet.org/ijbm

International Journal of Business and Management

Vol. 9, No. 11; 2014

Bacon.
Newman, W. L. (1994). Social research methods. Boston Allyn and Bacon.
Polit, F. D., & Beck, T. C. (2008). Nursing Researc –Generating and Assessing Evidence for Nursing Practice.
(pp.
1–816).
Retrieved
from
http://www.amazon.com/Nursing-Research-Generating-Assessing-Evidence/dp/1605477087#reader_16054
77087
Punch, K. F. (1998). Introduction to Social Research: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches (1st ed.).
London, Thousand Oaks California, New Delhi: SAGE Publications.
Punch, K. F. (2013). Introduction to social research: Quantitative and qualitative approaches. Sage.
Strauss,
A.
(1987).
Qualitative
Analysis
for
Social
Scientists.
Retrieved
from
http://books.google.com.au/books?id=y16ww5ZsJ0AC&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and
techniques.Sage Publications, Inc.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing
Grounded Theory (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, London, New Delhi: Sage Publications.
Tepper, B. J. (2000). Consequences of abusive supervision. Academy of Management Journal, 43(2), 178–190.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1556375
Willis, J. W. (2007). Foundations of Qualitative Research: Interpretive and Critical Approaches. Retrieved 11
May,
2013,
from
http://www.amazon.com/Foundations-Qualitative-Research-Interpretive-Approaches/dp/1412927412#reade
r_1412927412
Wolcott, H. F. (1980). Ethnographic research in education. Washington, DC: American Educational Research
Association.

Copyrights
Copyright for this article is retained by the author(s), with first publication rights granted to the journal.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).

233

